EduceLab-Scrolls: Verifiable Recovery of Text from Herculaneum Papyri using
X-ray CT
Stephen Parsons

C. Seth Parker

Christy Chapman

Mami Hayashida

arXiv:2304.02084v2 [cs.CV] 8 Apr 2023

stephen.parsons@uky.edu

W. Brent Seales
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY, USA

Abstract

1. Introduction
In 79 AD, the eruption of Mount Vesuvius destroyed the
ancient Roman towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum, bombarding Pompeii with volcanic rock and debris and burying
Herculaneum in up to 25 meters of pyroclastic ash. Among
the buried structures in Herculaneum was a large seaside
villa that, upon its discovery and excavation in 1752-54,
was found to contain a large library of papyrus rolls. This
collection of more than 900 scrolls was damaged yet remarkably preserved. The fast-moving river of hot gas and
ash from Vesuvius had simultaneously heated the papyrus
scrolls to combustion temperature and extinguished any
oxygen around them, carbonizing them in place. Blackened
and brittle like charcoal, the Herculaneum scrolls were rendered highly fragile, easily falling to pieces with light contact.
Referred to as the “Herculaneum papyri,” this collection
represents the only library from antiquity ever discovered
in situ, prompting various attempts over the years to physically unroll them and read their enticing contents. These
efforts have generated a substantial quantity of legible text
and scholarship, but have also led to widespread destruction. Many scrolls that were opened were broken into many
small fragments, or once had portions that are now lost entirely. Hundreds of other scrolls were left intact, their contents completely unknown to this day.
In recent decades, advanced imaging technologies have
introduced counter-methods to the physically destructive
approaches of the past. In particular, X-ray micro-computed
tomography (micro-CT, or CT) has proven successful as
a tool for noninvasive textual discovery [40]. However,
despite the successful application of high-tech approaches
to similar collections around the world, noninvasive techniques struggle to surface the contents of the Herculaneum

We present a complete software pipeline for revealing the
hidden texts of the Herculaneum papyri using X-ray CT images. This enhanced virtual unwrapping pipeline combines
machine learning with a novel geometric framework linking 3D and 2D images. We also present EduceLab-Scrolls,
a comprehensive open dataset representing two decades of
research effort on this problem. EduceLab-Scrolls contains
a set of volumetric X-ray CT images of both small fragments
and intact, rolled scrolls. The dataset also contains 2D image labels that are used in the supervised training of an
ink detection model. Labeling is enabled by aligning spectral photography of scroll fragments with X-ray CT images
of the same fragments, thus creating a machine-learnable
mapping between image spaces and modalities. This alignment permits supervised learning for the detection of “invisible” carbon ink in X-ray CT, a task that is “impossible” even for human expert labelers. To our knowledge,
this is the first aligned dataset of its kind and is the largest
dataset ever released in the heritage domain. Our method
is capable of revealing accurate lines of text on scroll fragments with known ground truth. Revealed text is verified
using visual confirmation, quantitative image metrics, and
scholarly review. EduceLab-Scrolls has also enabled the
discovery, for the first time, of hidden texts from the Herculaneum papyri, which we present here. We anticipate
that the EduceLab-Scrolls dataset will generate more textual discovery as research continues.
Note: The names and images of some scroll fragments
are temporarily obfuscated due to the ongoing Vesuvius
Challenge. For more information, and to participate in this
research challenge, visit scrollprize.org.

1

scrolls due to several technical challenges. First, the detection of ink on the writing substrate is problematic. Known
as “lamp black” and made from fine soot, the ink used by the
Herculaneum writers is almost pure carbon. The papyrus
writing substrate is organic plant material, also largely made
of carbon. The result is little to no visible ink contrast in Xray, which is key to the prior success of virtual unwrapping
methods. Images generated by the traditional virtual unwrapping of Herculaneum CT data show a blank page with
no writing.
Another primary challenge concerns the physical interior structure of the scrolls – multi-layered, wrapped, compressed, and highly irregular – and the three-dimensional
image segmentation problem it generates. To manufacture
papyrus, two or more layers of plant fibers are pressed together and naturally adhere, forming a multi-layered single sheet. The extreme environment of carbonization often
causes these sheets to bubble or delaminate, increasing the
number of apparent layers in CT images. Further, the scrolls
are large, contain many wraps (on the order of hundreds),
have adjacent wraps that are pressed tightly together, and,
in many cases, have been compressed and crumpled during
their burial. Micro-CT is able to penetrate to the scroll interior at high enough spatial resolutions to clearly show this
internal structure of warped layers, and even the detailed
grid-like structure of the papyrus sheet fibers. But deciphering these forms into the specific surfaces on which the ink
lies is nonetheless difficult.
Though formidable, we believe these challenges can
now be addressed as the result of multiple advancements.
Imaging resolution, machine learning tools, and computational methods are simultaneously maturing enough to enable strong results. With the right experimental framework,
the low contrast ink can be detected using machine learning
models. This method leverages the otherwise destructive
physical unrolling efforts, as the detached fragments with
visible ink can be used as a training dataset. The segmentation problem is also addressable, as improved methods that
follow the structure of the papyrus fibers are able to extract
order from the chaos of the damaged material.
To this end, we present EduceLab-Scrolls, a multimodal
image dataset of Herculaneum papyri, along with a machine
learning-based method for ink detection. EduceLab-Scrolls
represents two decades of research progress into the noninvasive discovery of the hidden texts of the Herculaneum
scrolls. The dataset contains high resolution volumetric images from X-ray micro-CT of both intact, rolled scrolls and
small detached scroll fragments. To our knowledge, this is
the largest such dataset released in the heritage domain.
A primary contribution of EduceLab-Scrolls is not only
the quantity and resolution of the CT images, but also the
aligned image labels generated using a multi-step process
described in Appendix A. The volumetric X-ray CT images

are aligned with 2D surface images, such as full color and
spectral photographs, of the same objects. These aligned labels enable supervised learning for micro-CT input images,
leading to trained models capable of detecting carbon ink in
CT. To our knowledge, this image alignment framework is
unique to this work, and this is the largest release of such an
aligned image dataset.
We also present a baseline method for learning the CT →
ink-presence mapping, a refinement built on top of previous
work [30]. This method is trained on EduceLab-Scrolls and
is capable of recovering hidden text (shown in Figure 1c)
given only X-ray CT images as input. This method operates
only on image pixels, identifying them as ink or not ink.
The method and its trained model possess no knowledge
of character alphabets, optical character recognition (OCR),
paleography, or handwriting analysis. Thus it is completely
incapable of recognizing letter characters or shapes. The
text characters that emerge result purely from plotting the
local ink detection “spots” across a generated image.
This noninvasive recovery of hidden Herculaneum text,
sealed inside the scroll since its destruction in 79 AD, is
a world first on a research problem that has been pursued
since the scrolls were first unearthed. Despite other claims
to noninvasive textual discovery from Herculaneum papyri,
we assert this is the first method capable of generating substantial text suitable for literary scholarship. To be readable,
letters should form lines with uniform and expected scale,
spacing, and margins [1]. Our method is the first capable of
meeting this threshold, and further is the first to verify readability using scroll fragments with known ground truth. We
evaluate our method against this threshold with visual confirmation, quantitative image metrics, and by image transcriptions from Herculaneum papyrus scholars.
With EduceLab-Scrolls, we invite the scholarly and
technical community to validate and extend these results.
Though the dataset and method presented are designed to
fulfill the specific applied objective of reading Herculaneum
papyri, we believe they also offer a new path forward for
other domains and detection problems. For example, supervised learning on medical X-ray CT often uses human
expert labeling: a doctor examines the CT manually, and labels what is visually observed. A model is then trained to reproduce this detection. This work suggests a new paradigm.
We demonstrate that X-ray micro-CT captures information
that is not visible to the human eye, and that models can be
trained to detect such signals. To do this, images from a different modality containing the sought after information are
aligned with the CT data and used as a training dataset. By
leveraging the correspondence between imaging methods,
previously invisible signals become visible.
2

To be released.

To be released.

1
2

]η[
]ι.[

1
2
3

] ink traces [
]τε. υc.[
] ink traces [

1
2
3
4

].[
]π. ρ.[
].α.[
] ink traces [

Partially redacted.
(a) Ground truth

(b) Ours, surface

(c) Ours, hidden

(d) (c), transcribed

Figure 1. Ink detection results for Herculaneum Fragments 1-4. (a) Ground truth infrared photographs of fragment surfaces. (b) Our
method (Volume Cartographer + inkid) on fragment surfaces, generated purely from X-ray CT. Cross-validation used to prevent model
memorization. (c) Our method on subsurface hidden layers, revealing text that has not been seen in nearly 2,000 years. (d) Greek
transcriptions of (c). ] and [ indicate line beginning and end. Dot indicates indistinct ink traces, underdot indicates uncertain transcription.

2. Results

shows the performance of our method, which is capable of
learning the presence of carbon ink inside CT images of
scroll fragments. Figure 1a shows ground truth infrared im-

Using EduceLab-Scrolls, we present benchmark ink detection results on Herculaneum scroll fragments. Figure 1
3

ages of the fragments, displaying the known true location
of ink on their surfaces. These fragments each come from
a scroll that produced many such fragments, and scholars
have identified the texts of these scrolls. Fragments 1 and 2
are from a philosophical work authored by Philodemus, as
are many others in the Herculaneum collection. This book,
titled On slander, comes from his greater work On Vices
and the opposite virtues. Fragments 3 and 4 come from a
scroll about Hellenistic Dynastic history. Our objective is
to scan these fragments using X-ray CT and detect the ink
inside those scans, starting by validating our results on the
surface against the ground truth images.
Working solely from X-ray CT images, we apply the
method to the exposed fragment surfaces, generating images showing the predicted location of carbon ink (Figure
1b). Our method successfully reveals the correct location of
much of the carbon ink on these surfaces, generating images
with legible and accurate text. Notably, though our method
presently fails to detect some challenging ink spots, it does
not hallucinate or generate substantial false positives that
would mislead scholarly interpretation.
We next apply our method to hidden, subsurface layers
of the scroll fragments for which there is no ground truth.
Shown in Figure 1c, the ink detected by our method reveals
Greek characters for these layers as well, recovering text
that has not been seen in nearly 2,000 years. Crucially, the
scale, line separation, and script of the revealed characters
are consistent with those observed on the fragment surfaces.
The results presented with this work represent the first
time the hidden texts of Herculaneum have been recovered
noninvasively. The quantity and quality of the revealed text
will both continue to increase as methods are refined and
more data is acquired. We believe this milestone proves the
feasibility of noninvasive text recovery for the Herculaneum
papyri, and marks the transition from proof of concept to
scaling across the entire collection.

label images. An eight-fold cross-validation setup is used
for Figure 1b, in which each of the four fragment surfaces
is split into top and bottom halves, yielding eight total fragment regions. Eight independent ink detection models are
then trained, each one training on seven of the eight training
regions but omitting one. After training, the model generates an ink prediction image for the held-out region that it
has not seen during training.
This ink prediction image is composited over the Volume Cartographer texture image: an intermediate product
of the data processing pipeline which clearly reveals the papyrus fiber structure in X-ray but does not exhibit visible
ink contrast. The composite image, created simply by subtracting the ink prediction image from the texture image,
creates an image of the prediction region that shows both
the papyrus fiber structure of the surface, as well as the detected ink regions in black. All eight of these images are
then compiled together, yielding Figure 1b. The result is a
combined image showing the general ability of the learned
models to detect carbon ink in X-ray CT. Cross-validation
is chosen in order to avoid model memorization, in which
the model is asked to generate predictions for regions it has
already seen during training. Memorization would invalidate the ink detection results, as instead of learning to truly
identify the presence of carbon ink, the model could simply remember what label was associated with a particular
input. Cross-validation instead ensures the model is being
evaluated on its actual ability to generalize to unseen examples. Of course, this is the ultimate objective of the model,
as it will later be applied to hidden, subsurface layers for
which there is no ground truth and it would be impossible
to memorize.
Figure 1c illustrates this mode, in which a trained model
is applied to hidden layers extracted from the X-ray CT under the exposed surface. In this case, there is no risk of
memorization, so a model is trained on the entire training
dataset, or all four fragment surfaces. This one model is
then used to generate the prediction images seen in Figure
1c.

2.1. Experimental setup
The following high-level experimental setup was used
for the results shown in Figure 1. Details can be found in
Appendix A.
The ground truth images in Figure 1a are 1000nm infrared photographs, acquired by Brigham Young University
beginning in 1999 [11, 51]. This form of imaging and specific wavelength are chosen for the high contrast captured
between ink and papyrus.
The images in Figure 1b are the result of a machinelearning based method for ink detection. The model receives small 3D regions of X-ray CT as input, and learns
to classify them as “ink” or “not ink” based on the presence
of ink at their central voxel. The ink labels used during supervised model training are created by labeling the infrared
photographs of the fragment surfaces, creating binary ink

2.2. Evaluation
We verify the accuracy of our ink detection method
against fragment surfaces with known ground truth. In particular, we are interested in recall and false positives as they
quantify subjective qualities of interest: how much of the
true text can be recovered, and how much false text is generated in error? While it is acceptable not to detect challenging ink regions, the model should not substantially “hallucinate”; that is, it should not generate misleading images of
characters that are not actually present.
4

2.2.1

Visual

Visual confirmation allows even a non-expert to quickly
verify the generated images against the ground truth, checking for rough accuracy, recall, and noise in the generated
images. This validation is used extensively in the development cycle as an early indicator of model performance.
Visual inspection allows one to evaluate multiple subjective qualities that combine to create “readability,” a measure
that in our experience does not always correlate precisely
with quantitative metrics. A brief visual comparison of Figure 1b against the ground truth in Figure 1a suggests that
the method is correctly detecting the locations of text lines,
nearing ∼ 50% recall of individual characters, and without
notable false positives (characters that do not exist in the
ground truth).
2.2.2

µ

σ

Binary cross entropy
Dice
Recall
FPR

0.44
0.87
0.41
0.051

5.6 × 10−3
6.2 × 10−3
3.0 × 10−2
9.9 × 10−3

Table 1. Aggregate validation results for the pixel-wise binary
ink detection task, across Fragments 1-4, following 8-fold crossvalidation. Mean (µ) and standard deviation (σ) reported for each,
sampled from the second half of 620,000 total training batches.

Table 1 shows the metrics associated with the results visualized in Figure 1. The results are aggregated across the
8-fold cross validation, meaning the 8 individual predictions
are compiled and then metrics are computed. As output predictions fluctuate throughout training, the mean µ and standard deviation σ are reported, taken from the second half of
620,000 training batches. The second half is chosen as the
model converges before this point.
The quantitative metrics agree with the visual results,
with recall higher than the false positive rate by a factor
of 8. Both visual and quantitative results suggest the model
is capable of accurate ink detection without significant hallucination.

Quantitative pixel-based metrics

We also report the quantitative performance of our method
using image comparison metrics. As this is a new task
and dataset, these are presented primarily as a benchmark
against which future improvements can be evaluated.

2.2.3

(a) Ground truth

Metric

Papyrological character-based metrics

Quantitative image metrics are helpful for method development, as they can be automated and provide quick feedback.
However, they do not exactly capture the ultimate objective,
which is the readability of generated text to the trained papyrologists who study the Herculaneum papyri. Again we
measure recall and false positives, this time with respect to
individual characters as identified by papyrologists.
We provided our generated images of Fragments 1-4
(Figure 1b) to a Herculaneum papyrologist, who was previously unfamiliar with these fragments. They transcribed
each fragment based solely on the provided images, which
are generated purely from X-ray CT. In all cases, the scholar
was able to identify the correct number of lines of the
fragment surface, even correctly identifying in Fragment 3
where the surface is broken and marks a transition between
two separate writing layers.
Figure 3 shows the Fragment 3 transcriptions from the
ground truth and generated images, respectively. Of the 15
characters identified in the ground truth, 7 are recovered accurately using our method. No characters are misidentified,
or identified where none exist.
Table 2 summarizes these results across Fragments 1-4.
In all fragments but Fragment 1, recall exceeds the false
positive rate by at least a factor of 2. The results are computed using a “strict” scoring, in which even those charac-

(b) Ours

Figure 2. Ground truth and our output for the binary ink classification task on Fragment 3.

Ink identification is performed as a binary classification
task, with predictions generated for each output pixel individually. Figure 2 visualizes this task, showing the ground
truth binary label mask (2a) and our generated prediction
image (2b). Once pixel predictions are aggregated at the image level, they can be evaluated against the ground truth using common metrics from semantic segmentation, another
common computer vision task.
We report the widely used binary cross entropy and Dice
[19] metrics. Additionally, we include recall and false positive rate (FPR) for their aforementioned ties to subjective
qualities of interest.
5

layer a
1
2
3

].ην[
]ο. μανδ[
].νουκ.[

1
2
3

layer b
1
2

layer a

3.1. Virtual unwrapping

].ην[
].....[
].νουκ.[

Virtual unwrapping [35, 38] has now been established as
a prominent intersection of heritage science and computational methods, and there are a growing number of successful applications. Virtual unwrapping involves noninvasive
volumetric imaging followed by a multi-step computational
pipeline that traces the 3D geometry of the surfaces (segmentation), filters the volumetric image to make writing appear (texturing), and maps the result to a 2D image that is
easily read (flattening). The details of these steps and their
ordering can vary to adapt to different challenges.
Multiple works have applied virtual unwrapping as a
functional proof of concept on lab-made proxy manuscripts,
illustrating the potential across a range of imaging methods, writing substrates, inks, and manuscript forms such as
scrolls, codices, and folded sheets. Early work focused on
proxy materials with exaggerated features, validating the
computational concept using much lower imaging resolution than is now available [24,25,39]. Since then, virtual unwrapping has worked for bamboo scrolls [44, 45], metallic
inks on parchment [46, 47], rolled and folded papyri [3, 8],
and even specifically carbon ink on papyrus in the right conditions [30, 50].
Building on the learnings from lab-made proxy
manuscripts, other works have gone on to recover text from
genuine heritage manuscripts. These also span a wide range
of materials, including metallic inks on parchment, paper,
and papyri [2,9,18,20,26,27,32,33,40], etched metal scrolls
[6,7], and lead amulets [52]. Some works [43] focus specifically on segmentation, leaving ink detection as future work.
Ultimately, the goal of developing virtual unwrapping methods is to recover substantial texts leading to new material for
scholarly publication, an objective achieved with the EnGedi scroll [40, 41].
The above works vary significantly in the segmentation
approach and in the imaging method. The segmentation
approach varies in order to handle different materials and
their respective geometries. Imaging techniques are typically varied in order to generate high contrast between the
ink and substrate, if possible. Relying on this strong contrast, texturing methods are consistently simple local filters
that directly extract the image intensities in a local neighborhood. Recently, this has shifted with the introduction of
machine learning-based texturing methods that detect subtle
signals [30] and learn to map the volumetric input to other
image domains [31].

layer b

]ο. ν[
]ε. c..[

1
2

(a) Ground truth

]..[
].c..[
(b) Ours

Figure 3. Greek transcriptions for Fragment 3 from a trained papyrologist, of both the ground truth image and our generated image.
] and [ indicate line beginning and end. A dot indicates indistinct
ink traces and an underdot indicates an uncertain transcription.

Fragment

Characters

Recall

FPR

1
2
3
4
Cumulative

26
59
15
25
125

0.23
0.41
0.47
0.64
0.42

0.27
0.22
0.00
0.12
0.18

Table 2. Character recall and false positive rate (FPR) across Fragments 1-4, comparing human transcriptions from our generated
images against human transcriptions from ground truth. The number of characters in the ground truth transcription is also shown.

ters identified as uncertain by the papyrologist are scored.
Excluding these characters would further improve the results. Further, characters that are mistakenly identified are
typically the result of partial ink recovery, showing only
some of the ink strokes making up a complete character.
Importantly, the misidentified characters are not invented
“whole cloth.” They are at least identified in the correct
location, and could be accurately identified with marginal
improvements in ink detection.
These results are a tremendous step forward from the
previously nonexistent baseline. This method already performs well enough to generate valuable text for Herculaneum papyrologists, who are used to working with fragmentary writing even in the best cases. That said, there is clear
room for improved performance, which we anticipate will
follow this work.

3.2. Noninvasive study of Herculaneum papyri
For fragments with exposed writing, strong visual contrast is possible through the use of spectral imaging in
the infrared bands [11, 51]. For a rare Herculaneum fragment with text on the verso, or the back side of the writing surface, the use of shortwave-infrared (1000-2500 nm)

3. Related work
EduceLab-Scrolls builds on a wide-ranging body of
work across heritage science, machine learning, and applied
computational methods.
6

imaging has even enabled the recovery of this writing [49].
While exciting for the few exposed fragments with verso
text, this method has limited penetration into the papyrus
and would not extend to the hidden layers within a rolled
scroll.
Considerable work has investigated the chemical composition of the ink of the Herculaneum papyri fragments, with
the goal of informing future imaging methods that would
be able to capture clear ink contrast from within an intact
scroll. There have been mixed results. Early investigations [36] used at least nine different imaging technologies
on three Herculaneum fragments, looking for signals that
would differentiate ink from papyrus. Scanning electron
microscopy and X-ray fluorescence found calcium in the
ink but not papyrus, and particle-induced X-ray emission
suggested the trace presence of lead and strontium in the
ink only.
Other work with different Herculaneum fragments has
discovered a stronger presence of lead in the ink, leading
to clear imaging contrast using X-ray fluorescence [12, 48].
The reason for the lead presence is not yet known, but could
arise from contamination or from deliberate use as a pigment, binding, or drying agent. It is also not known why
the ink of some fragments exhibits a strong lead profile
while others do not, though this is not too surprising, considering the Herculaneum papyri were authored by different scribes, using homemade inks, over a period of three
centuries. A more recent and thorough X-ray fluorescence
study of 38 Herculaneum scroll fragments validated the
other studies, finding multiple elements that sometimes correlated strongly with ink: phosphorus, 5 fragments; iron,
3; copper, 3; and lead, 2 [10]. Carbon-based inks not specific to the Herculaneum papyri have also been studied thoroughly, with similar findings and implications [5, 17, 21].
Imaging of the intact Herculaneum scrolls has also matured, despite not yet achieving clear ink contrast. The first
X-ray CT images of intact Herculaneum scrolls revealed
the internal structure but no ink contrast [34, 37]. Phase
contrast X-ray CT was also proposed [36] and then conducted [14, 15, 29] as a potential technique to achieve ink
contrast inside a rolled scroll. Despite early claims of textual discovery, this technique has not led to further discoveries or ongoing scholarly work. The most recent imaging
contains implicit phase shift data, but did not prioritize the
amplification of this shift, more resembling standard X-ray
micro-CT. These images and their processing, released in
EduceLab-Scrolls, instead represent a focus on the salient
cues we so far know are crucial to ink detection: the highest achievable resolution, precise segmentation, and accurate labeling. These factors combine to create a dataset in
which machine learning-based methods can detect the ink
presence, even without strong visual contrast.
We view the research and development of methods for

improved imaging contrast as highly complementary to the
work we present here. Though machine learning-based
methods are now capable of detecting Herculaneum ink in
X-ray CT images, there remains room for improvement. We
anticipate this will happen in part due solely to improved
software pipelines using existing data, but any improvement
in imaging contrast would greatly boost the ultimate accuracy. The additional information captured by phase contrast or other techniques can ultimately only help, as trained
models can select the most useful features from the input
images.

3.3. Volumetric datasets
Volumetric datasets are common in the medical domain,
but are of lower resolution due to the radiation dosage and
motion constraints of medical imaging. Methods developed
for volumetric medical images nonetheless do have significant overlap with those of virtual unwrapping, for example
in surface segmentation [23].
One of the most similar domains in terms of volumetric datasets and tools is connectomics, or the study of connections in the nervous system. Like the challenge of the
Herculaneum papyri, tracing the connections of neurons requires an unusual combination of volumetric image resolution and dimensions. The resulting large datasets have generated a growing ecosystem of file formats [28], web viewers [28], cloud volume processing frameworks [42], and
more. Today, both connectomics and virtual unwrapping
use specialized toolsets developed for particular domains or
even specific problems within a domain. We anticipate that
with recent successes in both fields, the tools will generalize
and become more powerful.
Even the most similar methods in these other domains
still rely on expert labeling for supervised tasks, in which a
human directly labels the volumetric image. We believe our
geometric framework is the first of its kind, through which
labels can be injected into the 3D volume from a 2D image
acquired in another modality.

4. The EduceLab-Scrolls dataset
4.1. Design
EduceLab-Scrolls is designed to be a comprehensive
dataset, with sufficient training and inference data to recover real texts from the hidden papyrus layers of the Herculaneum papyri collection. “Sufficient” here concerns both
quality and quantity. Further, much work is put into the geometry of the resulting images, such that a training dataset
can be constructed.
7

4.1.1

Quality

EduceLab-Scrolls contains all labeled training data generated to date, spanning 16 scans of 6 fragments from 4
scrolls. The training fragments themselves are each comprised of multiple papyrus layers, so in addition to exposed surfaces they contain hidden papyrus layers which
are candidates for inference and therefore the discovery of
previously hidden texts. The dataset also contains all releasable scans of intact Herculaneum scrolls to date: 9 CT
scans spanning 4 scrolls. The quantity of training and inference data is sufficient for the textual results presented in
this work, and we anticipate EduceLab-Scrolls in its current
form contains much more text that will be recovered from
the existing dataset. We further anticipate that these results
will only improve as more training and inference data are
eventually acquired and processed.

At a high level, sufficient quality means that the X-ray CT
volumes capture the ink presence in a way that is detectable
using learned methods. In practice, the two primary factors
are the scan image resolution and the energy of the incident
X-ray beam. For many virtual unwrapping projects, imaging voxel sizes in the range of 20-100µm are sufficient for
text extraction. This is due to the strong contrast achieved in
most cases, in which the dense, often metallic components
of the ink create a bright response in X-ray CT. Metallic inks
are capable of creating a brightness response in X-ray even
when the image voxel size is itself larger than the thickness
of the ink layer. With current imaging methods, this form
of contrast has not been achieved with the Herculaneum papyri. Instead, a much more subtle signal is captured, likely
relating not only to image intensity but to morphological
(texture, or shape) differences between ink and blank papyrus. As prior work has characterized the Herculaneum
ink thickness to be on the order of 5-10µm [30], CT image
resolution must approach this threshold in order to meaningfully resolve the detail needed for ink detection. This
threshold is frequently on the edge of feasibility using existing imaging techniques. The CT images in EduceLabScrolls therefore consistently represent the highest achievable resolution (smallest voxel size) for a given scan session. Available imaging technology at the time, physical
object dimensions, practical time constraints during scanning, and other factors result in CT scans that range from
2.23-23.9µm. Those datasets that we find most promising
are more tightly clustered between 3.24-7.91µm.
The relationship between incident X-ray energy and
achievable carbon ink detection is less understood, though
other work [46] as well as anecdotal evidence from our
own experience suggest that lower-energy CT scans better capture the subtle contrast of low-Z elements such as
carbon. Therefore, the scans in EduceLab-Scrolls largely
utilize the lowest achievable incident X-ray energy that
enables detailed reconstructions, ranging ultimately from
22kV-88keV. The differing units in this range hint at another
difference between X-ray beams: benchtop X-ray sources
use an X-ray lamp set to a particular kV in order to generate
a polychromatic X-ray beam with a wide distribution, while
synchrotron sources are capable of monochromatic X-ray
beams at a specific keV. It is not yet understood which form
of X-ray source best captures the ink signal, though we have
observed that both are sufficient.
4.1.2

4.1.3

Geometry

The EduceLab-Scrolls dataset is designed to enable supervised machine learning across 3D volumetric input images,
where labels are available only from 2D surface images.
The training dataset is constructed from those objects for
which labeling is possible, i.e. the detached scroll fragments
with exposed surface text. For these objects, labels are generated and aligned to volumetric inputs in a process outlined
in Figure 4. To reveal the ink of hidden, subsurface layers,
volumetric inputs without labels are created using steps (ad) of Figure 4, and a model trained on the training dataset
performs inference on these volumes.
The label alignment and generation process relies on
finding a shared image space, to which both the 3D volumetric images and the 2D surface images can be aligned.
The chosen space is the 2D image space created when the
segmented surface is flattened, a transition shown from Figure 4c to 4d. The “surface volume” shown in Figure 4d is
then sampled from the original volume into this flattened
space. The resulting image is volumetric and 3D, but can
also be considered as a 2D image with multiple depth channels. An infrared surface photograph (Figure 4e) is then
aligned (Figure 4f) to this surface volume, and a binary ink
label image is created (Figure 4g). The surface volume and
ink label now serve as an (input, label) image pair for supervised learning. This process is discussed in more detail in
Appendix A and is presented here only to illustrate the high
level dataset design.

4.2. Dataset overview
Table 3 contains an overview of the EduceLab-Scrolls
dataset. The field of view, voxel size, incident energy, and
disk size are listed for each CT scan included. Most fragments and scrolls are scanned at multiple energies, an exciting and under-explored opportunity that we believe will
lead to improved ink detection once leveraged. Each frag-

Quantity

The ink of the Herculaneum papyri is known to have variable thickness and composition, so there should be adequate training data to capture this distribution such that
models can generalize to the ink of unseen hidden layers.
8

Labels

(g)

IR photo

(e)

(f)

Inputs
X-ray CT
(a)
(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 4. EduceLab-Scrolls dataset geometry for an example fragment. (a) Scroll fragment, RGB photograph. (b) Volumetric X-ray CT
image. (c) 3D surface segmentation. (d) Flattened “surface volume” sampled about the segmented surface mesh. (e) Infrared photograph.
(f) Infrared photograph aligned to surface volume. (g) Aligned binary ink labels.

ment surface in the dataset also includes the full set of intermediate files from the data processing, representing the
steps of the segmentation and labeling phases. We believe
this is the first dataset of its kind and the largest dataset released in the heritage domain. Though the total disk size of
the dataset exceeds 11TB, the ink detection results in this
paper can be reproduced and extended using only the segmented surface volumes, totaling 55.8GB.

the accuracy of our generated images. We believe this approach represents the definitive pathway to reading the intact Herculaneum scrolls using current imaging technology
and computational methods.
We imagine broad future work in this research area.
Many exciting tools and advancements across virtual unwrapping and volumetric imaging, including this one, have
been developed for specific applied cases. With growing
successes, there is now a significant opportunity to combine
some of these tools into more generalizable and flexible
frameworks, making these methods accessible to a larger
pool of users.
With the discovery of hidden Herculaneum texts becoming a reality, it will also be increasingly critical to develop methods that are verifiable and reproducible [13, 16].
Via fragments with verifiable ground truth, open data release, and open source code, we aim to achieve this with
EduceLab-Scrolls and our method. We further aspire to
ease the reproducibility of these methods as we continue
to develop them.
Of course, there remains a clear gap between the results
presented here and the ultimate goal of reading intact Herculaneum scrolls in full. We are optimistic we will together
close this gap, as there are many opportunities for improvements in the existing pipeline. Improved ink detection is a
product of imaging, segmentation, alignment, labeling, and
classification tasks. EduceLab-Scrolls and our method provide a baseline for all of these, but each of them can be
independently refined to improve the final result. These im-

4.3. Availability
EduceLab-Scrolls will be released under the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 Public License.
A subset of EduceLab-Scrolls is already available under a
different license through Vesuvius Challenge, a machine
learning and computer vision competition to build on this
work and recover more text from the Herculaneum papyri.
For more information, visit scrollprize.org.

5. Conclusion
We have presented EduceLab-Scrolls, a first of its kind
dataset of Herculaneum scroll images that combines volumetric X-ray CT with aligned 2D labels. Together with our
software pipeline, which combines machine learning with a
novel geometric framework, the combined data and method
are capable of detecting the carbon ink inside Herculaneum
scrolls. Using scroll fragments with known ground truth,
we validate the method using multiple metrics, including
an assessment by Herculaneum scholars which confirms
9

FOV

Scan year

Voxel size (µm)

Energy

Size (GB)

Surface volume (GB)

Full
Full
Full
Full
Full
Full
Full
Full
Center
Center
Full
Full
Full
Full
Full
Full

2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2019
2018
2018
2018
2018
2019
2019
2019
2019

3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
3.2
2.2
11.9
5.1
5.1
3.4
3.4
3.4
3.4

54keV
88keV
54keV
88keV
54keV
88keV
54keV
88keV
44kV
60kV
44kV
49kV
22kV
29kV
40kV
59kV

136
159
602
560
113
125
198
202
73
5
171
213
145
143
145
136

6.3
TBD
18
TBD
4.9
TBD
7.3
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD
TBD

Fragment 1
Fragment 2
Fragment 4

–
–
–

2019
2019
2019

3.2
3.2
3.2

54keV
54keV
54keV

–
–
–

3.2
11
5.1

PHerc803
PHerc804
Scroll 1
Scroll 1
Scroll 1
Scroll 2
Scroll 2
Scroll 2
Scroll 2

Most
Full
Full
Half 1
Half 2
Full
Half 1
Half 2
Center

2019
2019
2009
2019
2019
2009
2019
2019
2019

23.9
23.9
23.9
7.9
7.9
27.1
7.9
7.9
7.9

70kV
70kV
70kV
54keV
54keV
70
54keV
54keV
88keV

151
206
107
1700
1300
277
3200
1200
284
11.5TB

–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
55.8GB

Fragments - labeled surfaces
Fragment 1
Fragment 1
Fragment 2
Fragment 2
Fragment 3
Fragment 3
Fragment 4
Fragment 4
PHerc. s.n. (Cass. 110)
PHerc. s.n. (Cass. 110)
PHerc. s.n. (Cass. 110)
PHerc. s.n. (Cass. 110)
PHercParisObjet59
PHercParisObjet59
PHercParisObjet59
PHercParisObjet59
Fragments - hidden layers

Intact scrolls

Table 3. EduceLab-Scrolls dataset overview. FOV: Field of view. keV indicates monochromatic synchrotron X-ray source, kV indicates
polychromatic benchtop source. Some names are temporarily obfuscated.

6. Acknowledgements

provements can also now be quantified, thanks to the introduction of labeled ground truth images from fragment surfaces. In our experience, small improvements to the various
stages of the pipeline combine to yield major improvements
in text readability. With time, we believe these cumulative
improvements will not only recover the complete texts of
the Herculaneum papyri, but will do so to a standard that
exceeds current imagination. We will wind back the clock
on these manuscripts, generating images of their texts as if
they were photographed the day they were written.

This work would be impossible without the tremendous
contributions of many collaborators, over a long period and
across many disciplines. We thank multiple papyrologists,
instrumental in providing feedback, advice, and interpretative contributions: James Brusuelas, Tobias Reinhardt,
Gianluca Del Mastro, Federica Nicolardi, Richard Janko,
Robert Fowler, Roger Macfarlane, Daniel Delattre, and
Marzia D’Angelo. Many students at the University of Kentucky have contributed to tool development and data pro10

cessing, including Bruno Athié-Teruel, Jack Bandy, Sydney
Chapman, Daniel Dopp, and Kendall Weihe. We are grateful to beamline scientists for their help with acquiring synchrotron CT data: Jens Dopke at Rutherford Appleton Labs,
and Michael Drakopolous, Thomas Connolley, Robert Atwood, Leigh Connor, and Nghia Vo at the Diamond Light
Source. Our partners at the institutions hosting Herculaneum papyri have graciously offered material access, assistance during imaging sessions, and many other valuable
contributions: M. Zink, M. Pastoureau, M. Leclant, M. Grimal, M. Danesi, M. Sabrina Castandet-Le Bris, M. Fabien
Queroux at the Institut de France; and Francesco Mercurio,
Fabrizio Diozzi, Luigi Vallefuoco, and many others at the
Biblioteca Nazionale di Napoli. We are grateful for imaging
resources and support from Micro Photonics, Graziano Ranocchia, Alessia Cedola, Sara Stabile, Francesca Palermo,
Inna Bukreeva, Daniela Mele, and the UCLA School of
Dentistry. Infrared images are a result of much work done
by Brigham Young University. We thank the University of
Kentucky’s Center for Computational Sciences and Information Technology Services Research Computing for use of
the Lipscomb Computing Cluster resources. We gratefully
acknowledge funding from The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, The National Endowment for the Humanities, and the
National Science Foundation. W.B.S. acknowledges funding from the NSF (award IIS-1422039). Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the NSF. W.B.S. acknowledges funding
from Google as well as individual supporters of EduceLab
and the Digital Restoration Initiative at the University of
Kentucky.

[6] Gry Hoffmann Barfod, John Møller Larsen, Achim Lichtenberger, and Rubina Raja. Revealing text in a complexly
rolled silver scroll from jerash with computed tomography
and advanced imaging software. Scientific reports, 5:17765,
2015. 6
[7] Daniel Baum, Felix Herter, John Møller Larsen, Achim
Lichtenberger, and Rubina Raja. Revisiting the jerash silver
scroll: a new visual data analysis approach. Digital Applications in Archaeology and Cultural Heritage, page e00186,
2021. 6
[8] Daniel Baum, Norbert Lindow, Hans-Christian Hege, Verena Lepper, Tzulia Siopi, Frank Kutz, Kristin Mahlow, and
Heinz-Eberhard Mahnke. Revealing hidden text in rolled and
folded papyri. Applied Physics A, 123(3):171, 2017. 6
[9] Ryan Baumann, Dorothy Carr Porter, and W Brent Seales.
The use of micro-ct in the study of archaeological artifacts.
In 9th International Conference on NDT of Art, pages 1–9,
2008. 6
[10] Olivier Bonnerot, G Del Mastro, J Hammerstaedt, V Mocella, and Ira Rabin. Xrf ink analysis of some herculaneum
papyri. Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik, pages
50–52, 2020. 7
[11] Steven W Booras and Douglas M Chabries. The herculaneum scrolls. In PICS, pages 215–218, 2001. 4, 6, 15
[12] Emmanuel Brun, Marine Cotte, Jonathan Wright, Marie
Ruat, Pieter Tack, Laszlo Vincze, Claudio Ferrero, Daniel
Delattre, and Vito Mocella. Revealing metallic ink in herculaneum papyri. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 113(14):3751–3754, 2016. 7
[13] James H. Brusuelas. Scholarly editing and ai: Machine predicted text and herculaneum papyri. magazén, 2(1), 6 2021.
9
[14] Inna Bukreeva, Michele Alessandrelli, Vincenzo Formoso,
Graziano Ranocchia, and Alessia Cedola. Investigating herculaneum papyri: An innovative 3d approach for the virtual unfolding of the rolls. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.09883,
2017. 7
[15] I Bukreeva, A Mittone, A Bravin, G Festa, M Alessandrelli,
P Coan, V Formoso, RG Agostino, M Giocondo, F Ciuchi,
et al. Virtual unrolling and deciphering of herculaneum papyri by x-ray phase-contrast tomography. Scientific reports,
6:27227, 2016. 7
[16] Christy Chapman, Seth Parker, Stephen Parsons, and
W. Brent Seales. Using mets to express digital provenance
for complex digital objects. In Emmanouel Garoufallou and
Marı́a-Antonia Ovalle-Perandones, editors, Metadata and
Semantic Research, pages 143–154, Cham, 3 2021. Springer
International Publishing. 9
[17] Thomas Christiansen, Marine Cotte, Wout de Nolf, Elouan
Mouro, Juan Reyes-Herrera, Steven de Meyer, Frederik Vanmeert, Nati Salvadó, Victor Gonzalez, Poul Erik Lindelof, Kell Mortensen, Kim Ryholt, Koen Janssens, and Sine
Larsen. Insights into the composition of ancient egyptian
red and black inks on papyri achieved by synchrotron-based
microanalyses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(45):27825–27835, 2020. 7
[18] Jana Dambrogio, Amanda Ghassaei, Daniel Starza Smith,
Holly Jackson, Martin L. Demaine, Graham Davis, David

References
[1] Can technology unravel the secrets sealed by mt. vesuvius
2,000 years ago? 2
[2] Fauzia Albertin. X-ray tomography for manuscripts. Umanistica Digitale, (12):39–64, 2022. 6
[3] Dario Allegra, Enrico Ciliberto, Paolo Ciliberto, Giuseppe
Petrillo, Filippo Stanco, and Claudia Trombatore. X-ray
computed tomography for virtually unrolling damaged papyri. Applied Physics A, 122(3):256, 2016. 6
[4] Robert C. Atwood, Andrew J. Bodey, Stephen W. T.
Price, Mark Basham, and Michael Drakopoulos. A highthroughput system for high-quality tomographic reconstruction of large datasets at diamond light source. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical
and Engineering Sciences, 373(2043):20140398, 2015. 15
[5] Pierre-Olivier Autran, Catherine Dejoie, Pierre Bordet, JeanLouis Hodeau, Caroline Dugand, Maëva Gervason, Michel
Anne, and Pauline Martinetto. Revealing the nature of black
pigments used on ancient egyptian papyri from champollion
collection. Analytical Chemistry, 93(2):1135–1142, 2021. 7

11

[19]
[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]
[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31] Stephen Parsons, Kristina Gessel, Clifford Parker, and
William Seales. Deep learning for more expressive virtual unwrapping. In Wolfgang Börner, Hendrik Rohland,
Christina Kral-Börner, and Lina Karner, editors, Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Cultural Heritage and New Technologies 2020., pages 203–207, 11 2020.
6
[32] Paul L Rosin, Yu-Kun Lai, Chang Liu, Graham R Davis,
David Mills, Gary Tuson, and Yuki Russell. Virtual recovery
of content from x-ray micro-tomography scans of damaged
historic scrolls. Scientific reports, 8(1):11901, 2018. 6
[33] Oksana Samko, Yu-Kun Lai, David Marshall, and Paul L
Rosin. Virtual unrolling and information recovery from
scanned scrolled historical documents. Pattern Recognition,
47(1):248–259, 2014. 6
[34] Brent Seales. Lire sans détruire les papyrus carbonisés
d’herculanum. Comptes rendus des séances de l’Académie
des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, 153(153):907–923, 2009.
7
[35] W.B. Seales. Reading the invisible library: A retrospective. In Carl Brune and Caroline Foutch, editors, Modern Alchemy: New Technology for Museum Collections.
Gilcrease Museum, 2017. 6
[36] W Brent Seales and Daniel Delattre. Virtual unrolling of carbonized herculaneum scrolls: Research status (2007–2012).
Cronache Ercolanesi, 43:191–208, 2013. 7
[37] W Brent Seales, J Griffioen, R Baumann, and M Field. Analysis of herculaneum papyri with x-ray computed tomography. In International Conference on nondestructive investigations and microanalysis for the diagnostics and conservation of cultural and environmental heritage, 2011. 7
[38] W Brent Seales and Y Lin. Digital restoration: Principles
and approaches. In Proceedings of DELOS/NSF Workshop
on Multimedia in Digital Libraries, 2003. 6
[39] W Brent Seales and Yun Lin. Digital restoration using volumetric scanning. In Digital Libraries, 2004. Proceedings
of the 2004 Joint ACM/IEEE Conference on, pages 117–124.
IEEE, 2004. 6
[40] William Brent Seales, Clifford Seth Parker, Michael Segal,
Emanuel Tov, Pnina Shor, and Yosef Porath. From damage
to discovery via virtual unwrapping: Reading the scroll from
en-gedi. Science Advances, 2(9), 2016. 1, 6
[41] Michael Segal, Emanuel Tov, William Brent Seales, Clifford Seth Parker, Pnina Shor, and Yosef Porath. An early
leviticus scroll from en-gedi: Preliminary publication. Textus, 26(1):29–58, 2016. 6
[42] William Silversmith, Forrest Collman, Nico Kemnitz, Jingpeng Wu, Manuel Castro, Ben Falk, Chris Roat, Thomas
Macrina, Eric Perlman, shangmu, Akhilesh Halageri, Pat
Gunn, Sridhar Jagannathan, Austin Hoag, Nicholas Turner,
and Sven Dorkenwald. seung-lab/cloud-volume: Zenodo release v1, Nov. 2021. 7
[43] Sara Stabile, Francesca Palermo, Inna Bukreeva, Daniela
Mele, Vincenzo Formoso, Roberto Bartolino, and Alessia
Cedola. A computational platform for the virtual unfolding
of herculaneum papyri. Scientific Reports, 11(1):1–11, 2021.
6

Mills, Rebekah Ahrendt, Nadine Akkerman, David van der
Linden, and Erik D. Demaine. Unlocking history through automated virtual unfolding of sealed documents imaged by xray microtomography. Nature Communications, 12(1):1184,
3 2021. 6
Lee R Dice. Measures of the amount of ecologic association
between species. Ecology, 26(3):297–302, 1945. 5
Paul C Dilley, Christy Chapman, C Seth Parker, and W Brent
Seales. The x-ray micro-ct of a full parchment codex to recover hidden text: Morgan library m.910, an early coptic acts
of the apostles manuscript. Manuscript Studies: A Journal of
the Schoenberg Institute for Manuscript Studies, 7(1):162–
174, 2022. 6
Adam Gibson, Kathryn E Piquette, Uwe Bergmann, William
Christens-Barry, Graham Davis, Marco Endrizzi, Shuting
Fan, Sina Farsiu, Anthony Fitzgerald, Jennifer Griffiths,
et al. An assessment of multimodal imaging of subsurface
text in mummy cartonnage using surrogate papyrus phantoms. Heritage Science, 6(1):7, 2018. 7
Jiang Hsieh. Computed tomography : principles, design,
artifacts, and recent advances, chapter 3, pages 63–90. SPIE
Press, Bellingham, Washington, 3 edition, 2015. 13
Kang Li, Xiaodong Wu, Danny Z Chen, and Milan Sonka.
Optimal surface segmentation in volumetric images-a graphtheoretic approach. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, 28(1):119–134, 2005. 7
Yun Lin. Physically-based digital restoration using volumetric scanning. PhD thesis, University of Kentucky, 2007. 6
Yun Lin and W Brent Seales. Opaque document imaging:
Building images of inaccessible texts. In Computer Vision,
2005. ICCV 2005. Tenth IEEE International Conference on,
volume 1, pages 662–669. IEEE, 2005. 6
Chang Liu, Paul L Rosin, Yu-Kun Lai, and Weiduo Hu. Robust virtual unrolling of historical parchment xmt images.
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 27(4):1914–1926,
2018. 6
Heinz-Eberhard Mahnke, Tobias Arlt, Daniel Baum, HansChristian Hege, Felix Herter, Norbert Lindow, Ingo Manke,
Tzulia Siopi, Eve Menei, Marc Etienne, and Verena Lepper.
Virtual unfolding of folded papyri. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 41:264–269, 2020. 6
Jeremy Maitin-Shepard, Alex Baden, William Silversmith,
Eric Perlman, Forrest Collman, Tim Blakely, Jan Funke,
Chris Jordan, Ben Falk, Nico Kemnitz, tingzhao, Chris
Roat, Manuel Castro, Sridhar Jagannathan, moenigin, Jody
Clements, Austin Hoag, Bill Katz, Dave Parsons, Jingpeng Wu, Lee Kamentsky, Pavel Chervakov, Philip Hubbard, Stuart Berg, John Hoffer, Akhilesh Halageri, Christian Machacek, Kevin Mader, Lutz Roeder, and Peter H. Li.
google/neuroglancer:, Oct. 2021. 7
Vito Mocella, Emmanuel Brun, Claudio Ferrero, and Daniel
Delattre. Revealing letters in rolled herculaneum papyri by
x-ray phase-contrast imaging. Nature communications, 6,
2015. 7
Clifford Seth Parker, Stephen Parsons, Jack Bandy, Christy
Chapman, Frederik Coppens, and William Brent Seales.
From invisibility to readability: Recovering the ink of herculaneum. PLOS ONE, 14(5):1–17, 05 2019. 2, 6, 8

12

A. Methods

[44] Daniel Stromer, Vincent Christlein, Xiaolin Huang, Patrick
Zippert, Tino Hausotte, and Andreas Maier. Virtual cleaning
and unwrapping of non-invasively digitized soiled bamboo
scrolls. Scientific reports, 9(1):2311, 2019. 6
[45] Daniel Stromer, Vincent Christlein, Andreas Maier, Patrick
Zippert, Eric Helmecke, Tino Hausotte, and Xiaolin Huang.
Non-destructive digitization of soiled historical chinese bamboo scrolls. In 2018 13th IAPR International Workshop
on Document Analysis Systems (DAS), pages 55–60. IEEE,
2018. 6
[46] Daniel Stromer, Vincent Christlein, Christine Martindale,
Patrick Zippert, Eric Haltenberger, Tino Hausotte, and Andreas Maier. Browsing through sealed historical manuscripts
by using 3-d computed tomography with low-brilliance x-ray
sources. Scientific reports, 8(1):1–10, 2018. 6, 8
[47] Daniel Stromer, Vincent Christlein, Tobias Schön, Wolfgang
Holub, and Andreas Maier. Browsing through closed books:
Evaluation of preprocessing methods for page extraction of
a 3-d ct book volume. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, volume 229, page 012005. IOP
Publishing, 2017. 6
[48] Pieter Tack, Marine Cotte, Stephen Bauters, Emmanuel
Brun, Dipanjan Banerjee, Wim Bras, Claudio Ferrero,
Daniel Delattre, Vito Mocella, and Laszlo Vincze. Tracking
ink composition on herculaneum papyrus scrolls: quantification and speciation of lead by x-ray based techniques and
monte carlo simulations. Scientific reports, 6(1):1–7, 2016.
7
[49] Aurélie Tournié, K Fleischer, I Bukreeva, F Palermo, M
Perino, A Cedola, C Andraud, and G Ranocchia. Ancient
greek text concealed on the back of unrolled papyrus revealed through shortwave-infrared hyperspectral imaging.
Science Advances, 5(10):eaav8936, 2019. 7
[50] George J Tserevelakis, Margarita Tsagkaraki, Panagiotis
Siozos, and Giannis Zacharakis. Uncovering the hidden content of layered documents by means of photoacoustic imaging. Strain, page e12289, 2018. 6
[51] Gene A Ware, Douglas M Chabries, Richard W Christiansen,
and Curtis E Martin. Multispectral document enhancement:
Ancient carbonized scrolls. In IGARSS 2000. IEEE 2000
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium.
Taking the Pulse of the Planet: The Role of Remote Sensing in Managing the Environment. Proceedings (Cat. No.
00CH37120), volume 6, pages 2486–2488. IEEE, 2000. 4,
6, 15
[52] Birgit Wilster-Hansen, David C. Mannes, Karen L.
Holmqvist, Kristine Ødeby, and Hartmut Kutzke. Virtual unwrapping of the bispegata amulet, a multiple folded medieval
lead amulet, by using neutron tomography. Archaeometry,
11 2021. 6

The data in EduceLab-Scrolls is built on two forms of
imaging. Volumetric X-ray CT is used to image all objects: both intact scrolls, and detached scroll fragments. For
scroll fragments with exposed text, spectral imaging is also
used to capture the presence of ink. To create a labeled
dataset, a geometric software pipeline aligns the two image modalities. Ink detection models can then be trained to
learn the ink presence in the X-ray CT images. Finally, the
trained models are applied to hidden, subsurface layers in
order to reveal previously unseen ink. The following section presently describes the X-ray CT and spectral image
acquisition. Details of the remainder of the pipeline will be
added soon.

A.1. Tomographic imaging and reconstruction
All volumetric datasets in EduceLab-Scrolls were acquired using X-ray micro-computed tomography (microCT) during multiple imaging sessions between 2009 and
2019. Due to advances in imaging technology, advances
in our understanding of the materials, and the availability of
both samples and equipment over this time period, materials were not imaged under the same conditions. The data
was acquired using a range of imaging configurations and
vary most importantly in their X-ray source types, incident
energies, and spatial resolutions.
Imaging and volumetric reconstruction for all datasets
followed the same high level workflow. X-ray projection
images of a sample were captured from a dense number of
rotational positions around the object, following a circular
scan trajectory. These projections were then reconstructed
into tomographic volumes using some form of filtered backprojection [22], often employing an implementation provided alongside the scanning hardware. Volumes were then
sliced along the rotational axis and quantized with manually
determined intensity windows to create 16-bit TIFF image
stacks.
In circumstances where the object did not entirely fit into
a single field-of-view, multiple overlapping offset images
(horizontal and/or vertical) were acquired for each rotational position. Horizontal offset images were stitched prior
to reconstruction to form a single, wider projection image.
Images taken at vertical offset positions were reconstructed
as separate CT volumes, which we refer to as “slabs,” and
were later merged during post-processing to form a single,
coherent volume.
A.1.1

Institut de France, 2009

Scrolls 1 and 2 were scanned at the Institut de France (Paris,
France) in July 2009, marking the first time tomographic
imaging was used to analyze the interior of closed Herculaneum scrolls. Both scrolls were acquired using a Skyscan
13

1173 micro-CT machine which had been installed at the Institut solely for the duration of the imaging session. This
scanner was equipped with a Hamamatsu 40-130kV (8W)
X-ray source with a < 5µm spot size and a 2240x2240 flat
panel detector with a 50µm pixel pitch.
Because the Skyscan 1173 scans objects in an upright
orientation, custom-fitted scan cases were required for both
scrolls in order to safely support each scroll during microCT acquisition. Prior to the scanning session, the surface
profile of both scrolls was acquired using a portable laser
scanning system. Since Herculaneum materials have low
reflectivity in the visible light spectrum, many gaps in the
laser-derived profile data had to be manually interpolated in
order to construct a complete surface profile. This final profile information was then used as the base model to which a
case was molded using expanding urethane foam.
The projection images for both scrolls were captured at
70kV, 100µA with an exposure time of 700ms and averaging over 8 consecutive frames. Two horizontal and four vertical offset positions were used in both instances to capture
the full length of each scroll. For Scroll 1, this configuration
produces a final reconstructed voxel size of 23.94µm. For
Scroll 2, which has a larger diameter, the final reconstructed
voxel size is 27.17µm. Both scans were reconstructed using
the Skyscan NRecon software.
A.1.2

ture a central region of the fragment under alternative configurations. Core scanning is often employed when it is impossible or infeasible to scan the entire sample at a specific
resolution, instead targeting a small, representative regionof-interest. As a preliminary to a much higher resolution
scan, a 23mm diameter core scan was taken at 60kV, 165µA
with an exposure time of 2120ms and averaging over 5
consecutive frames. Pixel binning (2x2) was employed to
improve image exposure times, resulting in a final reconstructed voxel size of 11.95µm. An 8mm diameter core scan
was also captured at 44kV, 222µA with an exposure time of
2750ms and averaging over 3 consecutive frames. Due to
time constraints, offset imaging was not employed, resulting in a final reconstructed voxel size of 2.24µm.
All scans captured during this session were reconstructed
using the Skyscan NRecon software.

A.1.3

UCLA School of Dentistry, 2019

In June 2019, two intact scrolls, PHerc. 803 and 804, were
scanned at the UCLA School of Dentistry (Los Angeles,
USA). The scan session was organized in collaboration with
the J. Paul Getty Museum, which subsequently presented
both scrolls as part of the “Buried by Vesuvius: Treasures
from the Villa dei Papiri” exhibition at the Getty Villa. Both
scrolls were acquired using a Skyscan 1173 micro-CT machine provided by the UCLA School of Dentistry.
Prior to the scanning session, the surface profile of both
scrolls was used to construct custom-fitted scan cases in a
process similar to the one used in 2009. To avoid previous issues with gaps in a laser-derived surface profile, photogrammetry capture and reconstruction was instead used
to generate the surface profile. By augmenting image capture with external lighting, the surface features of both
scrolls were very clear in the photogrammetry image set,
and the surface profiles for each scroll could be reliably
reconstructed with little manual intervention. These surface profiles were loaded into CAD software and used to
design custom 3D case models which were subsequently
fabricated using selective laser sintering (SLS) of Nylon 12
powder. To protect the scrolls from the possibility of unintended abrasive damage, each case was lined with a layer of
Teflon Relic Wrap prior to sample mounting.
The projection images for both scrolls were captured at
70kV, 114µA with an exposure time of 1115ms and averaging over 7 consecutive frames. Two horizontal and three
vertical offset positions were used to capture the majority
of PHerc. 803. Two horizontal and four vertical offsets
were used to capture the entirety of PHerc. 804. For both
scrolls, this configuration produces a final reconstructed
voxel size of 23.88µm. Both scans were reconstructed using
the Skyscan NRecon software.

Università degli Studi di Bari “Aldo Moro”, 2018

In November 2018, an unnumbered (sine numero or s.n.)
fragment from cassetto 110 at the Officina dei Papiri Ercolanesi (Naples, Italy) was scanned multiple times at the
Dipartimento Scienze della Terra e Geoambientali, Università degli Studi di Bari “Aldo Moro” (Bari, Italy). The fragment was selected for imaging due to its compact size and
clearly visible surface text. For organizational purposes, we
have labeled this fragment PHerc. s.n. (Cass. 110). In total,
four scans of the fragment were captured using a Skyscan
1172 micro-CT machine equipped with a 20-100kV (10W)
X-ray source with a < 5µm spot size and a 4000x2664 CCD
detector with a 9µm pixel pitch.
In order to maximize the possibility of differentiating the
ink from the papyrus in the reconstructed data, the scans
captured during this imaging session prioritized high resolutions (< 10µm voxel sizes) and low incident energies
(≤ 50kV). The entire fragment was scanned across two incident energies at approximately 5 µm voxel sizes. The first
of these was captured at 44kV, 222µA with an exposure time
of 2400ms. The second scan was captured at 49kV, 200µA
with an exposure time of 2400ms and averaging over 5 consecutive frames. One horizontal offset was used in both instances to achieve a final reconstructed voxel size of 5.09µm
and 4.96µm respectively.
Two additional “core scans” were also performed to cap14

A.1.4

Diamond Light Source, 2019

The projection images of Fragments 1-4 were captured
using optical module 3 at both 54keV and 88keV with an
exposure time of 3ms. The number of offsets used for each
fragment was selected in order to fully capture each sample, and the offset positions were fixed between the 55keV
and 88keV scans. Two horizontal and six vertical offsets
were captured for Fragment 1. Three horizontal and 10 vertical offsets were captured for Fragment 2. Two horizontal
and five vertical offsets were captured for Fragment 3. Two
horizontal and seven vertical offsets were captured for Fragment 4. The final reconstructed voxel size for all scans of
Fragments 1-4 is ≈ 3.24µm.
All scans captured during this session were reconstructed
using the Savu tomography reconstruction and processing
pipeline [4].

In September 2019, two scrolls (Scrolls 1 and 2) and four
fragments (Fragments 1-4) were scanned over many days
on the I12 beamline at the Diamond Light Source (Didcot,
Oxfordshire, England). Unlike the scanning environments
used for the other datasets in this collection, the I12 beamline is an extremely brilliant light source which provides a
parallel beam and monochromatic x-rays. Though the parallel geometry does not support geometric magnification of
the scan volume, four high-resolution optical modules provide pixel sizes from 18.53µm down to 1.3µm. These system properties enabled the acquisition of extremely highresolution scans of full scrolls and fragments that would
have otherwise been infeasible in commercial micro-CT
hardware.
Prior to the scanning session, scan cases were constructed for each scroll using the same method employed
in A.1.3. However, a manufacturing defect in the case for
Scroll 2 resulted in that sample being scanned in the case
constructed for the 2009 scan session (A.1.1). Fragments
1-4 had previously been mounted to tissue paper for conservation and storage. For scanning, these were individually mounted into acrylic frames which held the tissue paper firmly in place while leaving the fragment undamaged.
These frames were then mounted to the sample stage with
standard hardware.
Though the I12 sample stage provides motor-controlled
vertical sample translation, the lengths of both scrolls exceeded the total vertical travel distance of the system. To
capture the full lengths of the scrolls, a manual lab jack was
used to provide additional travel. With the jack extended,
each scroll was first scanned from the bottom to the furthest vertical position possible given the available motorized travel. The jack was then compressed and the scroll
was rescanned, this time from a point partway up the scroll
to the top of the scroll. This process produced two independent scans for each scroll, a lower and upper half which we
have labeled Half 1 and Half 2 respectively.
The projection images of Scrolls 1 and 2 were captured
using optical module 2 at 54keV with an exposure time of
3ms. Frame averaging was applied during flatfield acquisition but was not employed during primary imaging. For
Scroll 1, two horizontal and 11 vertical offsets were captured for Half 1, and two horizontal and 10 vertical offsets
were captured for Half 2. For Scroll 2, three horizontal and
11 vertical offsets were captured for Half 1, and three horizontal and five vertical offsets were captured for Half 2.
Due to a miscalculation in the projected position of the axis
of rotation, a cylinder of diameter ≈ 4.8mm at the core of
Scroll 2 is not represented in the projection images. This results in a noticeable gap and reconstruction artifacts in the
reconstructed volumes. The final reconstructed voxel size
for Scrolls 1 and 2 is ≈ 7.91µm.

A.2. Spectral surface imaging
The infrared surface images were acquired by Brigham
Young University (BYU) using a multispectral imaging
(MSI) system beginning in 1999. Images were acquired
across a range of wavelengths, from 450nm to 1000nm.
Due to the varying dimensions of Herculaneum scroll fragments, the resolution ranges from 300 to 600 dpi. More
details can be found in the original publications about this
imaging work [11, 51].
The 1000nm images from the BYU dataset, and those
from similar wavelengths such as 950nm, have become
standard resources for papyrologists working with Herculaneum papyri due to the high contrast captured between
ink and papyrus. This contrast dramatically exceeds that
observed by the naked eye in visible wavelengths, where
the black ink can be difficult to see against the carbonized
papyrus background. For this reason, 1000nm images are
chosen as the ground truth images in our work.

15

