From the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C.
Good afternoon and welcome to our Topics in Preservation series.
I'm Fenella France, Chief of the Preservation Research
and Testing Division, and we're delighted to have you here today.
The presentation today is the Digital Restoration Initiative,
Reading the Invisible Library, and our speaker is Dr. Brent Seals.
Brent is a Professor and Chairman of the Department of Computer Science
and the Director of the Center for Visualization
and Virtual Environments at the University of Kentucky.
His research centers on computer vision and visualization applied
to challenges in the restoration of antiquities, surgical technology,
and data visualization.
In 2012-13, he was a Google Visiting Scientist in Paris
where he continued work on the virtual unwrapping
of the Herculaneum Scrolls.
In 2015, Brent and his team identified the oldest known Hebrew
copy of the Book of Leviticus, which was carbon dated
to the third century CE, and this has been a very significant discovery
in biblical archeology.
It's particularly interesting because one of the things we find
in conservation and preservation is integrating new technologies
as a very important part of what we can do, particularly as we try
and do those non-invasively.
So I'd like to hand over now to Dr. Seals to give his presentation.
Please join me in welcoming him.
Thank you.
Thank you, Fenella, and thank you to the Library of Congress
for the invitation to come and speak to you today.
It really is a pleasure to be here from Kentucky,
and when people look at the slide and I begin my talk,
often they wonder, where is Kentucky exactly?
I'm not going to show you a map.
The other thing people wonder is what is the Digital
Restoration Initiative?
That's what I'm going to tell you about today.
Before I start my talk, I'd like to welcome the remote audience,
and thank you for joining, and also like to thank one of my sponsors
at the University of Kentucky, Lee and Stacey Marksbury,
for their kind support.
In fact, the invisible library, what I'm going to talk
about today is a phrase that I coined from an article
that was published in the New Yorker,
and that article was a retrospective of work that I'd begun
two decades ago at the British Library, and here's a picture
from that era when really we were talking
about the digital library,
which was about digitizing collections
and making them available on something that was new
at the time, we called it the World Wide Web, and now we think
of the internet as being the place
where glorious digital editions similar to the one we implemented
in the 1995 Macintosh can be available for scholars,
researchers, and the general audience to be able to view
and enjoy and do scholarship on.
This was the beginning of my odyssey into the digital library,
which then became for me the invisible library,
and I'm going to tell you the story of that
and how I became interested in some
of the most profoundly damaged parts of the invisible library.
An example here shown from the collection in Naples in Italy
from the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum.
This library discovered several hundred years ago is the only
classical library ever discovered in situ
and contained many thousands of manuscripts that were carbonized
and damaged in the form that you see here.
The retrospective that was written in the New Yorker,
I won't ask for a show of hands of how many of you read it,
some of you did, I see, had a really wonderful review
of all things Herculaneum, and the reporter, John Seabrook,
took the time to go through many of the details of Herculaneum,
but I'm going to spoil the end of the piece for you.
John ended the piece by saying, by quoting one of my colleagues
who said, I do not expect this scroll will be read during my
lifetime, and he closed the lid of the small box with both hands,
that box containing one of those scrolls,
his shoulders slumped in defeat.
I hated this ending.
When I read this ending, I almost, I was in the living room
with my family, I almost wept, and so I, rather than weeping,
I invited John out to the University of Kentucky
so that I could talk to him over bourbon drinks and the racetrack,
which is what we do at Kentucky, and ask him.
And, of course, we had a lovely time,
and John was really just writing the story about how hard it is,
actually, to read this material.
And as he followed my team along and wrote the article,
he did sense that, you know, we were struggling
because it is a hard problem.
And one of the things that I want you
to understand today is the time scale of the quest that I have been
on to be able to read some of this material
and convert the invisible library to the visible one.
And I also want you to understand some of my optimism
about why I think we're on the verge of being able to do some
of the most interesting material.
I am fundamentally an optimistic person, and my mom pulled
out from our archives, and you at the Library
of Congress will appreciate the idea of my mother creating
for me an archive of the Buffalo Evening News from 1969.
She pulled out the paper that she saved for me
about the moon landing, and I pulled that out just a few months ago
and opened it up and remembered how I felt, you know,
in that era of being inspired by what we could do
that we could engineer a way to actually walk on the moon.
So I'm going to start with a prologue about inspiration.
When I began this work in the late 90s,
this idea of converting the invisible library
into the visible library, and I hadn't given it words,
early in my work I was sent a letter from an unknown person
who had found evidence of my work in the literature.
Her name is Cheryl Seacrest, and she lives in this area.
And Cheryl found that I was doing work on digital restoration,
and she said to herself, well, you know, I have something
that needs to be restored.
So she cold called me, and she actually sent me the artifact,
and I'm showing you a picture of that artifact.
It was a one-page letter, and it had been faded
so that the text was not legible.
I took the letter to my lab, and this was prior to the time
that we had the sophisticated equipment that we have now.
And I know Fenella will understand when we talk
about spectral imaging and special light sources.
We just didn't have those things at the time in the lab.
We also didn't have the kinds of sensors we needed
to do imaging.
We did have flatbed scanners, though,
that were incredibly precise and very high resolution.
And I started to play with this letter and found a transformation
in the color spaces that were available that allowed me
to highlight exactly the place
in that flatbed scanner scanned image that would bring
out some of the text, giving me a handle
on a process for restoration.
And so we put a team together, and I had by hand a team
of students walk through the data
and do a complete restoration.
Now, what it really intrigued me, and the reason why I bring this
to you now, what really intrigued me about this is not
that we were being able to bring text that was invisible
to the visible place, but that the text represented a narrative.
And I was really interested in what the narrative was.
I mean, I had in my hands evidence of a story,
but I couldn't read the story
until we solved the technical problem.
Dearest Cheryl Ann, hello, my little darling.
How are you this evening?
Fine, I hope.
It turned out that this letter was from a father who was
in the World War II Pacific Theater on a landing ship tank.
It was from him to his daughter, and his daughter Cheryl was the
one who ended up sending me the letter to see
if I could do a restoration.
How wonderful it was when we read the letter
to realize Frank closes the letter, be a good girl,
oceans of love and kisses.
Please write soon.
Of course, I think Cheryl might have been three.
Love your daddy, Frank.
And, you know, what a beautiful image.
He is looking at an ocean, and it doesn't really look so kind, right?
It's the World War II Pacific Theater, but he writes oceans
of love because he's thinking about his daughter.
So all of this really resonated with me
and provided the inspiration, as I now look back, for the approach
to some pretty profoundly damaged materials
that I now call the invisible library.
On the left, you see an ancient manuscript,
a medieval manuscript, actually, from the Cotton Collection
at the British Library, left unrestored, damaged.
Most of the volumes in the collection were restored,
and I'll show you in a minute what they looked
like, that restoration.
On the right, you see court documents, probably Ming Dynasty.
These are in the archives
at the National Palace Museum in Taipei, Taiwan.
And, of course, you have the iconic Herculaneum scrolls,
of which there are probably two or 300 now,
still remaining unopened.
Little time capsules from the classical era,
representing the possibility of who knows what
if we could only read them.
And I will also talk today about what Fenella mentioned
in the introduction, which is the scroll from En Gedi,
this scroll having come to me through no fault of my own
from three years back, and turned out to be one
of our biggest successes.
So the roadmap for my talk is to first inspire you
with the textual so that you understand
that not only can we recover readable text,
but we can recover text to the degree
that we can understand narrative and do scholarship.
And I'm going to give you a flavor of the technical
so that you can understand exactly why this is a hard
problem, and what's changed in the last 10 years to be able
to allow us to solve this problem.
And then I'll finish my talk by speaking a little bit
about the collaborative, which turns out to be one
of the most crucial pieces of the puzzle to be able
to read the invisible library.
So let me start with digital restoration part one pages.
In the mid-2000s, I had the chance to do a project,
the Marchana Library, in collaboration
with Harvard University, the Center for Hellenic Studies,
which is right here in Washington,
D.C., run by Harvard University.
And the project was to capture a digital copy,
make a digital facsimile of the Venetus A,
which is the oldest complete copy of Homer's Iliad.
And of course, you know the story of Iliad
because we saw the movie with Brad Pitt, and those of us
who are computer scientists use that as the way
to solidify our education of the classics.
Prior to the facsimile we made in 2008 of the Venetus A,
there was one other facsimile.
It was 1908, early 1900s, either 01 or 08, photography done
by an Italian by the name of Comperetti.
And this image you see is the quality of that facsimile.
When I show you on top of that the quality of our facsimile,
not only is it better in color
because the original facsimile was black and white photography,
but it is also better in resolution.
Both of those features, color and resolution,
end up providing scholars with so much more information.
So the facsimile, simply as photography that we were able
to make, advanced the field
because scholars could take both the color
and the high resolution and the fact
that we could digitally disseminate this globally.
We actually negotiated a creative commons agreement
for the information we collected.
Allowed for a never before, a facsimile that was richer
than had ever been done before on the Venetus A.
So again, here you see a section
of the decoration on one of the pages.
It is a medieval manuscript and then you see as a layer
that I fade up the corresponding result from our facsimile
and you see how much better it is.
Now a few surprising things came out of this work.
Not only was I getting my bearings in what it meant
to do digital restoration, but on the left you see
in Comperetti's edition there's actually more information
available and visible than in ours
because in the intervening 100 years things
actually disappeared.
And we were actually surprised by that.
I don't know why now that I look back on it,
but I just thought well it's better imaging
and so we'll always have better results,
but some things disappear.
And so the comparison between the two and this,
as I play this fade from one to the other we'll show you
as a set of layers how you can compare the information
that is available in one and the other.
One thing I learned is
that when an artifact has been imaged over time,
it's really important not to get rid of any of those examples,
but to try to find a coherent way to put them all together.
So we began to think in terms
of pages not just sequentially representing a manuscript,
but temporally, right, representing a manuscript
as it has been photographed over time and try to find a way
to put those together and we developed some infrastructure
to be able to do that.
Second thing with regard to pages in that era
that we began to develop was the idea of digital restoration,
which is to imagine that after you've taken an image
of something that's badly damaged, you can without risk,
start to envision the possibility,
and here I'll highlight a damaged region and I will blow
up this region for you to see.
You can imagine the possibility of a digital restoration maybe
by an artist or by a scholar who really understood
from the data what really was there, and there's no risk
at all to the object to be able to view this
as a layer, as a page.
And it can be very interesting for scholars to be able to play
around this way and it can also be very entertaining
to imagine what should have been there, what maybe was there.
But one thing that it's not is risky because it's all digital
and the original artifact is set aside so that it's protected.
Wouldn't it be nice if in every case we paid a little bit more
attention to the physical, you know, disposition as opposed
to letting, you know, certain restorers run free.
Sometimes, you know, it's a lot safer
to do the digital restoration.
So let me just summarize this by saying
with pure manuscript pages I began to develop this idea
of comparisons over time, pages that have been taken
over time put together to be compared, and the visualization
of that using some technology like the registration
of pages so that they align.
And I want to point to, before I move on,
one of the key results from this era by my research team
and others having to do with registration.
So here's an example of a photograph of a fragment
from the Dead Sea Scroll Collection.
And a second photograph taken at a different time
with a different camera from an earlier era.
And if I go back and forth between these two images,
you'll see that the text doesn't line up at all.
If you focus on the text, the scale is different.
Some text is more visible in this ultraviolet shot,
infrared shot than it is visible in the visible light shot.
And so we undertook the idea
of registering these together based on just the text.
And so now I'm going to show you the algorithm running
to do the registration.
Registration became a core technology for us
and others in putting together things that have been taken
at different times with different devices over time.
So what's happening in this video is first we're seeking a
rigid transformation that tries to match the text from one image
onto the text of the other image.
When that fails, we do a non-rigid registration
which deforms non-rigidly the text of one onto the other.
And then when I fade back,
you'll see that the text matches exactly.
What we discovered in using registration
as a core technology is that if you focus on registration
around things like the text, which is the key thing,
then you can look at how other things have changed over time
and it becomes a really powerful way
to reconcile the diachronic part, the part over time
of a collection as it's been photographed.
Okay, so this takes me to the second part
of reading The Invisible Library, which is the fact
that not everything we photograph is flat.
In fact, it's far from flat.
It's almost impossible unless you're comparetti
on the Plaza San Marco in 1908
where you've been given the permission to slice the binding
from the book and you've been given the permission
to press each one of the pages between glass.
You've been given the permission to use the bright sunlight
on the plaza so that the lens can capture the best
possible image.
So in that case, in that case, things are pretty flat.
But in the case for the rest of us in the modern era
at the Library of Congress, for example, it's not going
to really be possible to take a manuscript like this.
And this is one of the restored manuscripts
from the Cotton Collection.
And what you see here is the original parchment,
the vellum, having been inserted into paper frames.
Paper and the vellum deform at different rates over time
and they cause this cockling to occur, it happens naturally.
And that cockling means that when you photograph that page,
assuming that it's flat, it creates deformations
in the letter forms, right, and even in those squares
that were drawn around the boxes, right,
those are no longer boxes.
Becomes really hard to remove the ambiguity of whether that's
in the manuscript itself or whether
that deformation is part of the fact
that the manuscript is wrinkled.
So we began to develop a way
to capture not just the photography, but also the shape
of every manuscript page as we did the digitization.
That shape helping us do the next step
in digital restoration.
So here you're seeing our early version of a system
that allowed us to capture the shape of every page,
reconcile the shape with the actual image,
and then following the capture of that,
do what I call digital flattening.
And the digital flattening allows us to take the page
as it sat and then run a simulation
to render what it would look
like had we been able to iron it out.
It's sort of digital ironing.
Pioneered this in the mid to late 2000s as a way to try
to recover the shape problem as opposed to just the photography.
So with layers and pages, we worked on ways
to amplify the image, then we started working on ways
to recover and restore the shape.
And of course, you see this is all done without risk
to the real object, premised on the idea of being able
to capture more information at digitization time.
So flattening allowed us to get at pages that were more
than just photography but included the shape,
3D representation, and then the visualization of that,
either as 3D or as 3D then flattened
so that you could see the layers and make the comparison.
Here, let me show you an example in practice
from the Cotton Collection and then ultimately applied
to the Chad Gospels, which you can find online.
If you'd like to talk to me afterwards,
I can just send you the link where you can find the entire
archive in the Creative Commons for noncommercial use
at the Internet Archive and at our website as well.
Take a look at the photography on the left.
You see that because the page is not flat,
that line at the bottom is not a line.
And then once it's been flat, that becomes a line,
even without that being a constraint.
And then if I show you an off-axis view and toggle
between that off-axis view and the 3D view,
you can see the result of the flattening
where the lines no longer crawl up over the hill
because we've removed the cockling.
And we've done it digitally as a restoration.
So what you're seeing here in my work are examples
of moving toward two things, a complete framework
for digital restoration and the idea
that when you collect data, you do more than make a facsimile.
What you're really interested in is doing data collection.
A facsimile is a byproduct of that.
And what you collect, say you collect spectral imaging,
you can make an RGB image from that,
but it's really the spectral block,
the data that you're interested in.
And we noticed this trend, others did as well,
and we started talking about beyond digitization, right,
working instead toward the complete capture of all
of the characteristics of a proxy of an object.
All right, so this brings me to the place
where now we can talk about complete unwrapping
and how you might approach something
in the invisible library that looks like this.
Okay? I wasn't introduced to the Herculaneum collection
as a child, nor did I study it at university.
History for me as a computer scientist went back
to the 1950s.
Prior to that, I know that a volcano did explode
in the Bay of Naples, and I have since, of course,
learned of the history, so I am now not ignorant of it, but,
you know, prior to my mid-2000s work,
I really didn't understand the significance of the collection
from Herculaneum, how significant these manuscripts
are that they were discovered at all, that they remained
after a volcanic explosion continues to be a miracle,
but also the fact that all prior attempts
at physical unwrapping generate this kind of damage.
This kind of damage was finally halted in the mid-'80s
and early-'90s, and that halting created an opportunity for me,
just as I came on the scene, and the opportunity was,
might there be a way to do the unwrapping
but do it completely digitally as a restoration,
rather than assume that there's going
to be a physical restoration process
that will allow this to happen.
So what I would like to show you now is the first example
of me ever having tried that on an example that I concocted.
Okay, so having latched onto this idea after the progression
of taking photographs and then rubbing out wrinkles
and thinking through, well, how could you do complete unwrapping?
I became familiar with imaging technology that was being used
in medicine called tomography, which allowed you
to get a non-invasive representation of an object
without opening it.
Three-dimensional, all the way through,
completely non-invasive, and the machines that were available
at the time were medical.
So I made a proxy, and I put it in a machine in the basement
of the medical center at the University of Kentucky.
I guess this is when everyone else was worried about Y2K,
and apparently I was not.
I was thinking about this.
I want to show you the data in its entirety,
and in playing the data, I want you to understand
that you're seeing the axial view.
So this is a piece of canvas.
It's rolled up, and you're seeing that canvas played
as a movie, edge on, with slice nearer you as the first frame
of that movie, and then slices as you go
down the roll as the movie plays.
So you can think about looking at the end of a jelly roll
as a deli slicer takes a piece off, and that's kind
of what this data looks like.
Let me point out that there are flashes on the canvas surface.
That's where the ink is.
So now that you've seen all the data, you should be able
to tell me exactly what it says, right?
Well, I couldn't for sure, although we constructed the object,
but once we used our software to convert the data
from the way it came from the scanner
into a complete three-dimensional model
that we could then unfurl, just a follow-on example
of rubbing out wrinkles digitally, this simulation allowed us
to be able to take that data in its original form and then put it
into a form that was readable.
And we dubbed this process virtual unwrapping
because what we were doing is unwrapping something
that was totally in 3D so that it could be viewed, again,
as a two-dimensional image.
So now if I ask you, what do you see in this image?
You probably will say to me, a bunch of wavy lines,
and I have no idea why you put that on this original artifact.
And yeah, I don't really know why I wrote these symbols either.
We got paint from a paint store and made this proxy
so that we could understand how the different paints would show
up in the imagery and if we could do complete unwrapping.
So first example, we were able to do complete virtual unwrapping
from data that came from a medical-grade tomography machine.
So I began working toward Herculaneum by building a set
of successfully more challenging examples
and more interesting text on those examples.
So here's some quotes from The Iliad.
Two fates bear me on to the day of death.
If I hold out here and I lay siege to Troy,
my journey home is gone, but my glory never dies.
If I voyage back to the fatherland I love, my pride,
my glory dies true, but the life that's left me will be long.
So which do you want?
Well, I want them both.
And we spent a lot of time in Jessamine County, Kentucky,
trying to add to the mix of our examples carbonization
because I was worried
that carbonization fundamentally would change things
in our ability to image and then do unwrapping.
So we burned a number of these examples until we figured
out how to do a vacuum-evacuated carbonization process.
And once we did, we were able to run a complete example through.
This is the data from one of those examples.
You see a lot more spirals.
You see the ink signal on the surface
of the papyrus available as brighter spots.
And I'll show you an example from that.
Since we scanned this in sections
to get higher resolution than was available
with medical-grade scanners, I'll focus
on a single-letter form, and that single-letter form
after the data is virtually unwrapped looks like that,
which inspired us to believe that even
through carbonization it's probably going to be possible
to see ink virtually through this process
of virtual unwrapping.
So the framework was set, and the examples led me to believe
that process of scanning using tomography,
probably x-ray based, but really any kind of method
that would provide a volume non-invasively
that captured the data would be the starting point.
Then this idea of segmentation, which is a technical term,
but it's the idea of finding exactly where the layer is
that has writing and then building a representation
around that, and then finally the visualization of the result
by doing some kind of unwrapping.
That became the pipeline and the framework as early
as the mid-2000s for what we want to do.
Now at this point, sometimes even I am a little confused
with the visualization of what this data looks like,
so I would like to play for you with audio a video
that reenacts an example so that you can get
in your mind how virtual unwrapping all
of these steps actually works.
So I'd like to play this now.
For thousands of years, people have written on scrolls.
The scrolls can contain historical records,
religious texts, or stories,
but many of them have been damaged over time.
For example, the Ayangedi Scrolls found near the Dead Sea
were in a building that had burned
down leaving the scrolls charred, blackened, and brittle.
But since the Ayangedi Scrolls would crumble to ash if opened,
how can we ever unlock their contents?
There is, in fact, a way to read scrolls without damaging them.
Imagine for a moment that a baker has two types of dough.
The white dough represents papyrus,
and the red dough represents ink.
Using the red dough, the baker can create a pie symbol
on the white dough.
When the baker rolls up the dough,
the pie symbol is obviously no longer visible,
just like when papyrus is rolled up.
Imagine the effects of time and the environment are this
as in baking the pastry for a thousand years.
If the pastry were still soft, the baker could simply unroll it,
but now it would break, and the information would be lost.
The baker can, however, slice the pastry
and decode the message from the traces
of red dough in each slice.
Using sophisticated technology, it is now possible for the scrolls
to be digitally unrolled without ever damaging the scroll.
It's important for damaged scrolls containing unique,
ancient information to be both physically
and digitally preserved.
There are many ancient scrolls which are too damaged to read
but likely contain historically enlightened information.
Digitization and virtual unwrapping allow us
to view this otherwise inaccessible information.
I'd like to especially acknowledge my son Jesse
who did the stop-motion animation as a project
in high school for that.
And that very last sequence actually took five hours.
So does that help?
Does that help give an intuition?
Yeah. So the x-ray basically gives you that without having
to do the actual slicing.
And then the rest is all software.
So you can imagine how excited I was to go to the Institut de France,
make the approach to Monsieur de Clanc, Le Clanc,
who was at the time the Secretary of Perpetual of the Academy
of Inscription et Ballet, which is the academy
that is interested in the classics.
And seated, he granted me the permission
with my collaborator Daniel de Lattre on the right
and the librarian Madame Pastoureau on the right.
Daniel on the left, Madame Pastoureau on the right.
To go ahead and scan two intact Herculaneum scrolls that happened
to be in the collection at the Institut de France.
They have six papyri from the Herculaneum site.
They were acquired by Napoleon.
I believe, in fact, I'm sure they were a gift to Napoleon.
And they ended up at the Institut de France.
Four of them were unwrapped.
And so they are in fragmentary state.
But two were intact.
And we believed at the time
that by scanning them using the best tomography of the day
and employing one of these three ideas, either a shape change
or perhaps some impurities in the ink
or maybe even a multi-power trick
where the x-ray would allow us
to use different power settings to see contrast.
That using one of those methods, we would be able
to push the data completely
through a virtual unwrapping pipeline.
And here you see Madame Fabien Kéroux, who was the conservator
at the time, handling one of those scrolls.
And as an aside, I want to tell you
that there were some surprising things that occurred.
Well, they were surprising to me at the time because I am naive.
I continue to be naive.
And I thought that the hardest part would be scanning the
scroll and then processing the data.
But in fact, the hardest part was protecting the scroll
so that we could scan it at all.
And we did that in the end by creating a custom fit case
that the scroll could be put into because it needed
to be turned on its end to be able to do a gentle pirouette
in the machine we had to do the tomography.
So, in order to create that case,
we scanned the exterior shape of the scroll, made a model.
And because we didn't have 3D printing at the time,
we used an artist and the model to cast a mold.
And that mold from plaster to injected polyurethane cut down
and then seeded with a base.
And I'm not really proud of that.
Plywood base, that was a prototype.
Ultimately, and you see one of the scrolls being form-fitted
into the shape that we have there.
Ultimately, we created these nifty cases
that the conservators agreed were a great way
to not only transport but also
to be able to scan the scrolls.
And that process took six months back and forth
with our designers to Paris.
You can imagine how mortified I was to have to go back
to Paris each time, time and time again.
But our goal was to capture the data and we did that in 2009.
This is the first radiograph of a Herculaneum scroll taken
in at the Institut de France on site.
And you'll see the seam in the radiograph going vertically.
The dark mass is the scroll itself.
You see some of the texture of the polyurethane as it was cast
and then you also see the sophisticated closure mechanism
on the top of the container
which is the rubber band holding the case together.
And here is what the reconstructed slice looked like.
In fact, let me play this for you as a movie, okay?
So this is no jelly roll, all right?
This is no piece of dough with one big pie waiting
for you to decipher it, okay?
I want you to take this in and imagine me watching this
and imagining how my software is going to find every one
of those layers automatically and then do the virtual unwrapping
of every one of those wraps.
And I'm sure right now you're counting those, right?
You're counting how many there are.
You can tell exactly how many there are.
Is that right?
Yeah, so I freaked out, you know,
because in the lab I was doing what's on the lower right.
And the reality of Herculaneum turned
out to be a lot more tortured and challenging.
So we had the permission to capture the data and we did.
We had what I believed was a complete pipeline for processing
and I still believe that pipeline is exactly the right way
to approach the problem.
But we were not able at the time in 2009 to segment the writing.
We were not able to actually solve this problem.
So this brings me to the second to the last part of my talk
where I'm going to talk about the miracle that occurred.
You know, whenever we get in trouble, right,
we expect an actual miracle to occur and sometimes it does.
Sometimes it actually does occur.
I love this quote from one of my favorite radio programs,
This American Life with Ira Glass, who interviewed Teller
of Penn and Teller, the magicians.
And Teller said, you can't look at a half-finished piece
of magic and know whether it's good or not.
It has to be perfect before you can evaluate whether it's good.
Either it looks like a miracle or it's stupid.
You know, when I heard this interview I thought actually
that characterizes virtual unwrapping for me.
Because until the magic occurred, I had been walking
around with a half-finished trick, right.
We hadn't actually completed the job.
We had data that was good and we had a pipeline
that we believed would work,
but we hadn't pushed everything all the way through
and so the trick was incomplete.
And when a trick is incomplete, yeah, it looks stupid, okay.
So how stupid did it look?
Well, I don't know how many
of you have googled your name and an adjective.
Just pick an adjective and see what comes out.
If you Google my name and stymied, and then you just hit,
I'm feeling lucky, you will find always
and forever probably this article
about how we weren't making progress on being able
to read these scrolls.
And that was true.
I wasn't able to really argue with that.
We were at an impasse until the scroll from En Gedi came my way
through No Fault of My Own three years ago.
So I want to talk to you about that scroll and why it was
so significant in helping me complete the process
of virtual unwrapping.
In 2015, I met Penina Shor, who is the head
of the Dead Sea Scroll Project at the Israel Antiquities Authority.
And I met her there because she had agreed to give me on disk all
of the data that she had scanned of this scroll that had been found
in an obscure location, the synagogue on the shore of,
the western shore of the Dead Sea in a town named En Gedi.
And it had been found 50 years ago.
It was so badly damaged that no one was able
to do any physical restoration.
She, on her own accord with the team, scanned it and was unable
to make any sense of the data and so agreed to give me the data
and let my team take a crack at it.
I'll always be grateful to Penina for giving me a shot
because in the intervening time,
our software had become a lot more sophisticated.
We worked on the data after she gave it to me.
And when she called for an update, I really thought nothing
of going ahead and sending her what our current progress was
because as you see being played in this movie,
our software had matured to the place where we were dealing
with real data and we were working daily on algorithms
that would help us improve our ability
to take really sophisticated data similar to Herculaneum data
and convert it into completely unwrapped results.
So I'm going to go ahead and forward past the rest
of this video and show you the first image that we obtained
from the En Gedi data.
And you can see in this draft image some problems, okay?
On the lower right, you see the smearing
from our incorrect algorithm at virtual unwrapping
where we were creating some smearing and some stretching.
But you can also see very clearly
that there is obvious writing.
And we were able to see that writing.
And it turns out that Penina was able to read that writing.
I sent her the draft and she said in an email
to me afterwards, Brent,
you won't believe what groundbreaking discovery
you've made.
It's still all hush-hush because we want
to have a press conference about it next week, which of course,
that was when the image I sent her was a draft.
And then she went on to say what we've deciphered is the first
chapter of the Book of Leviticus after the Dead Sea Scrolls.
This is the earliest Bible ever found.
We already have it carbon dated to the sixth century,
which turns out to be a misreading.
It was third century CE.
And if that's not enough, it's the first time a Bible,
Hebrew Bible has been found within an excavated synagogue.
So it turns out that it was a big discovery.
All they needed was the kernel of what we had done up until
that point to be able to read it because it was a known text.
And we did have the press conference the next week.
It's probably the first time Skype ran for an hour
without actually scratching, but you see me
in the background being projected from my office
at the University of Kentucky with my team behind me
like little angels whispering the right answers into my ears.
And you see in front in Jerusalem,
Pnina Shor on the left, Sephi Parath,
the original archaeologist who pulled it with his own hands
from the ground, who came out of retirement for that moment,
and on the right, David Merkle, who did the scan.
So let me tell you a little bit about this scroll
and show you our result, and then I'll complete my talk.
On the shore of the Dead Sea
in the early 70s was discovered an ancient synagogue.
It was Byzantine, and it is now a national park,
so you can go there and you can see the synagogue.
It looks like this.
It's a beautiful mosaic floor covered by a tent,
and in the floor was found the Holy Ark,
and in that Holy Ark is where the En Gedi Scroll was discovered.
It was so badly damaged that it was not possible
to identify anything about it,
but Sephi the archaeologist always believed
that it could hold significance, and so he told me personally
when we did the press conference,
he actually thanked me.
He said, I didn't know
if in my lifetime we would ever solve this mystery,
but let me show you now the second video
that actually has audio, which will explain
to you the complete unwrapping process on the En Gedi Scroll.
Virtual unwrapping begins
by acquiring a three-dimensional volumetric scan
of the damaged manuscript.
This scan produces a set of cross-sectional images
that show the internal structure of the scroll.
When viewed as a 3D object,
one can clearly see the individual layers of the scroll,
but any text on the surface of those layers is obscured from view.
In order for a readable version of the scroll to be produced,
these images must be passed
through our virtual unwrapping pipeline.
First, we capture the 3D shape of the layers of the scroll
in a process called segmentation.
On the left side of the screen,
the software moves through the scroll image by image,
tracing the shape of a single scroll wrap.
On the right, we see the 3D model that this produces.
Next, we extract the ink from the data
in a process called texturing.
Using the 3D shape generated by segmentation,
our software makes another pass through the scroll,
this time looking for very bright pixels.
Bright pixels indicate regions of dense material, in this case,
inks made with iron or lead.
We now have a single wrap of the scroll
with a text shown clearly on its surface.
However, because the surface is curved,
it's difficult to read all of the text from one viewpoint.
The flattening stage of our pipeline
converts this textured 3D surface into a flat plane
so that the text can be more easily read.
To produce the best results,
these three steps must be performed
on one small section of the scroll at a time.
As a result, we end up with several texture images
that must be merged together.
This merging process creates a single consolidated image
that shows the full text.
Using this pipeline, we have restored and revealed the text
of five complete wraps of the En-Gedi scroll.
The two distinct columns of Hebrew writing
reveal the scroll to be the Book of Leviticus.
This marks the En-Gedi scroll as the earliest copy
of the Pentateuchal book ever found in a holy ark,
a significant discovery in biblical archaeology.
And I'd like to give special thanks to my daughter
who did the voiceover.
Price was right on that deal.
And also, you know, I miss her.
And so I'm reminded of her when I hear her voice now.
Somebody after my talk asked me, is your daughter okay?
Thinking that maybe, you know, it was a memorial.
And I said, oh, no, no, she's fine.
She just lives in California, you know.
When they go off to California, you know.
So here you go.
This was our complete unwrapping, five wraps,
fully readable text, known text,
pushed through the entire pipeline.
The miracle occurred.
And now the magic trick actually looks
like it doesn't look stupid anymore, right?
Because it's complete and we pushed
through the entire pipeline and refined each section
of the pipeline to the point where now we think
that we're actually ready not only to solve the technical part
of virtual unwrapping for most materials,
but also to provide those materials as scholarship
to scholars who can then use the quality of our result to do,
for example, biblical scholarship.
And let me tell you that we did that with the En-Gedi Scroll.
And this is why it's significant, this dating in terms
of biblical scholarship occurs between the period
of the Dead Sea Scrolls, Second Temple Period,
a scroll from En-Gedi at 300 CE.
And really the next witness, which was six or 700 years later
where the Cairo Geniza gives evidence
of the Masoretic Text being settled.
And so there was some question about how early
that Masoretic Text goes back into the unsettled First
and Second Temple Period.
The scholars tell me all of this.
I am not a biblical scholar.
But look at what we were able to do.
We wrote a biblical scholarship paper together, Michael Siegel
and Emmanuel Tove, giants in the field of this area,
with me as a co-author.
And the reason why they allowed me to be a co-author is
because the image they used does not exist.
The image that they used is the result of a piece
of software that we wrote, right?
It's completely generated virtually.
It's not a photograph, right?
It's not the result of physically unwrapping anything.
And so we were able to take that image at a quality high enough
that a paleographer and a biblical scholar could print it
out and create basically what they would do
with the photograph of an open fragment.
And then because they could see all the letter forms,
do paleography, a complete transcription
and biblical scholarship.
So from the pages to the flattening
to the complete 3D unwrapping, you see the progression
of this work to the place where now I can talk
about my rousing conclusion,
which is what I'm calling reference amplification
and the use of what we all have heard of in the news
in the last several years, machine learning.
Now I want to tell you why machine learning is really
important, because conventional wisdom,
which is almost always wrong, which somehow I seem
to always adopt, right, tells us a few things.
It tells us that, well, that scroll was probably a fluke.
Seals got lucky, that's for sure.
There's obviously metal in the ink
so that you could see the signal really easily.
So this probably isn't going to have any relevance
to Herculaneum, because we all know there's no metal
in the ink, etc., etc.
Conventional wisdom.
Oh, also, conventional wisdom also tells us, you know,
why couldn't it be Genesis?
You know, why would it have to be?
It's just as an aside.
Well, it's true that there was metal in the ink.
We don't know exactly the composition,
because we analyzed everything non-invasively.
But if you take a look at the signal in this figure
from our paper, you can see really bright
where the Hebrew letters are, meaning, you know, very dense,
lots denser, right, than the surrounding material
of the animal skin.
So how do I answer that conventional wisdom?
I mean, for the longest time, I also believed this statement.
Carbon ink is invisible in tomography.
I don't know if those of you who know may have heard that.
But, you know, we were doing some work
at a high-energy physics facility,
and whenever I hang around bright people,
they raise me up, right?
Does that work for you?
I don't know if I actually get smarter,
or I just act smarter because they're all smart, right?
But, you know, we started working together,
and I started thinking, really, carbon's not visible?
I mean, why is everything else visible
in some way, shape, or form?
But carbon ink on carbon's not visible.
I just don't get that.
So we ran some numbers, and I started to think about it.
So I went back to my kitchen,
and we started to do some experiments.
I got out the iron gall, not the iron gall, the carbon black.
I ruined a few utensils, and I made some patterns.
And, you know, I really gobbed it on because I thought,
you know, I'm going to see what's going on here.
And then we got a little bit more sophisticated
with some test patterns and papyrus
and some other real materials, and we started
to do a systematic study instead of just relying
on conventional wisdom, and guess what we found?
Of course carbon is visible in tomography, okay?
There it is.
Carbon on paper.
On the left you see that the carbon
in the paper look very similar in density because they're
about the same at that energy, and on the right you see
that the paper is much brighter than the carbon
at the other energy, and we can actually look at this.
Different energies, different contrasts between the two.
Then I did an experiment with some students where I asked them
to write up some, make up some proxies,
and this student decided, Allie decided that she was going
to put carbon black on papyrus, excuse me, on parchment.
We hadn't really done that before.
Carbon black on parchment.
Most of the ink we've seen on parchment is iron gall.
So she did that, and she scanned it, and she ran our tool
to unwrap it virtually, and then she showed us the result,
and there is a delta in carbon.
Why can you see it?
It's supposed to be invisible in tomography, right?
Well, we did a little bit of work
and found that what's actually going on is
that you can see the carbon, but you have
to have the right resolution, and you have to tease it
out from the underlying pattern of whatever the structure is
that the carbon's on.
If it's on papyrus, you end up with this fiber pattern
that is really hard for your eye, you know,
to see the difference when there's carbon on there.
Papyrus has that fiber structure, but parchment doesn't,
and the reason that Allie was able to see the carbon ink
on the parchment was because the parchment was really smooth,
right, and then you get that carbon on there,
you can see it straight away.
So we actually started to do some experiments
where we took carbon ink on papyrus,
and we developed a framework for being able to tease
out what you can't see with the eye,
and we used machine learning to do it, and let me show you one
of our first examples, and then I'll finish.
On the left, you see a test pattern.
654 at the top is six coats, five coats, four coats,
real scientific, right?
On the right, you see the tomography to give you a sense
of what you can see with the naked eye and what you can.
On the left column with six coats,
you can actually see there's enough density
that the carbon's visible, but as you get
down to only four coats, you can't see it anymore.
What we hypothesized was
that we could train a machine learning system
to understand the patterns in the carbon
that you wouldn't be able to see with the naked eye,
and here is the result from that first experiment showing
that the machine learning system is able to amplify the ink
in that fourth column even though you can't pick it
out with your eye, and here's the triptych that shows you.
On the left, the original pattern for column four,
the training sample, and then the amplification on the right.
So I call this reference amplified computed tomography,
and the idea is that you use a set of examples
of what the ink looks like in tomography to train
up a huge scale machine learning system
and that it can detect subtleties in the tomography
that you cannot see with your human eye.
Reference amplified computed tomography is actually now
for me a wholesale change
in the way I believe tomography should be treated.
In fact, tomography is not for you.
It's not for me.
It's first for the machine learning system
which amplifies what you want, and then the result is
for you and for me.
Here's an example on a real fragment.
The photograph on the left shows you a lunate sigma
from Herculaneum.
It's real carbon ink from Herculaneum,
and on the right you see a volume render of the tomography,
and I don't think that you can probably see the ink
because we looked at that and thought we'd failed.
Okay? Now, this is what the data looks like,
and as the bar goes left to right you see
on the right what the slices look like.
It turns out you can't really see the ink
in the slices either.
You know, you'd like to be able to see those bright spots
like I showed you in my early examples,
but we just don't see that, but what we do have are lots
and lots of fragments from Herculaneum that are open,
and they have visible text on the front.
That visible text we believe can form for us a reference library,
a reference library for machine learning
so that when we scan what those look like in tomography,
we can leverage that to build a neural network,
a relational neural network,
to be able to amplify what the tomography actually looks
like for ink.
Here's the example.
The lunate sigma with the green box,
the green box being right here, shows the size of the test
that we give to the machine learning system.
That little section we say, take a look at that
in the tomography, that's where we think ink is.
And then we also move that box around and say, okay,
here's a spot where there's no ink.
That's where we know there's no ink.
So we have a training system that says, here's ink,
here's no ink, learn the difference.
We actually do that on a tenfold experiment,
which is the lower right.
Ten sections, we drop one out, train on nine,
classify on the one, because we don't have a full
reference library yet.
This is the tenfold experiment that simulates being able
to have a bigger reference library.
Let me show you the result
of having done the machine learning to classify ink.
Here's the original data.
And here is an amplification
of the ink using the neural network we trained.
Pure carbon ink from Herculaneum.
Okay, now as we turn on the result of the classification,
you see that the classifier, at about 80% precision recall,
is able to give a pretty good estimate of that lunate sigma.
Okay? So here is the triptych
that shows you the reference photo, the amplified result,
and the original tomography,
with machine learning being the instrument that we use
to defeat conventional wisdom,
and pull out very subtle signals in tomography.
So I have numbers here, and if you'd like to talk
with me afterwards about precision recall,
the way we structured the network,
how many test examples there were,
convolutional neural networks on 3D, we can talk about that.
But what I want to do is just show you a quick example
that I worked up over a larger text
to show you what it would look like if we could get 80
or 90% precision recall on carbon ink in a real text.
So there's the text in its glory,
and here's what it would look like at 50%.
Sixty, 70, 80, and 90.
Now if we push that back into a volume, and I've blown this
up a little bit, so that you can see
that the fibers really do confuse the ability to read.
Fifty, 60, 70, 80, and 90%, and then the reference image.
We believe if we can take open fragments
and get a neural network to do detection at between 80
and 90% precision recall, we'll be able to read any kind of ink.
Are there plenty of things that fall into this category?
Very well, yes.
Let me say that the invisible library is extensive,
includes all kinds of surprising things
that you may never have heard of,
even if you're not a computer scientist.
For example, there's a manuscript from Jack London
in the Huntington Library in California that was badly burned
in the earthquake, 1906, in San Francisco,
and now it's carbonized, but it was probably written in an ink,
in a variety of inks that would respond really well.
For example, the Franklin papers,
manuscript that was discovered on a cadaver
from the Franklin expedition,
search for the Northwest Passage, all sailors lost.
Cartonnage, lord knows there's cartonnage everywhere, right?
And inside that cartonnage there may be original manuscripts,
and of course, the enigmatic Herculaneum Scrolls,
which I hope someday we will read.
So now to my epilogue, and to conclude my talk,
I'd like to say that collaboration is the key
and the glue to making all of this work.
I've talked about the textual and I've talked
about the technical, so now let me just say a word
about collaboration.
Our most recent project at the Morgan Library was
to take tomography and apply it to this manuscript,
the Morgan M910, which is an early Egyptian Coptic acts
of the apostles, unable to be opened or restored
because the damage inside is profound.
And let me say that in approaching this project,
you see the manuscript in the center.
I'd like to identify the people involved to make this happen.
We have conservators led by Maria Fredericks.
We have a manuscript scholar,
Paul Dilley at the University of Iowa.
We have engineers from Micro Photonics
who graciously donated to my team the scan time
that we needed to do the project.
We have a research specialist, Kristi Chapman,
who's in the audience today.
We have a computer scientist who is my staff member,
Seth Parker, and we have, of course, the media who share
with us the ability to tell stories.
And let me tell you that telling stories is a big part
of what it's about.
It was the beginning of my motivation because the narrative
of the story is the thing that we're actually all
after in the end, isn't it?
So if I put that on a diagram for you and I leave it in French
so that we all understand how collaborative we have to be,
yes, I still try to learn French.
I would like to conclude my talk by thanking you for listening
and asking if you would like to ask me any questions.
Thank you very much.
So we're going to take some questions.
I'm going to ask Brent if he or I will repeat your question
so that the external viewers can actually hear the question.
So he will rephrase it to how he would like to answer.
Given that we're in Washington, I'd be happy
to rephrase the question into one that I can answer.
So, questions.
So, just to clarify a point that I'm not sure if I completely missed it.
The machine learning, the computer is learning to identify ink
from novel elements or character from novel elements.
So the question is what exactly is the machine learning doing
in this case?
And my answer is your instinct, which is yes,
the machine learning is helping us classify ink from no ink.
Now, other applications
of machine learning help you recognize higher level things.
There is work being done to recognize letter forms,
do OCR, that kind of thing.
What we're interested
in tomography is purely amplifying a very weak signal.
And so we're doing machine learning at the level of ink, no ink.
Yes?
In the machine, apropos machine learning exercise,
have you just tried filtering the background given that the paper
or the substrate has particular, has particular frequencies to,
as a, presumably what the machine learning is doing is filtering
out certain kinds of features characteristic of background.
But you could directly filter.
Yes, absolutely.
So let me rephrase the question.
The question is why don't you just use conventional techniques
and filter out the background,
which would then give you the foreground signal.
And what we're doing is using machine learning as the mechanism
for doing exactly that.
And the reason why we need so sophisticated a tool is
because the variation in the fiber structure
of the papyrus masks the weak signal
of the carbon fairly profoundly.
And we haven't found a direct way to be able
to capture that signal.
But through millions of examples
in a supervised learning setting we have been able
to capture that signal.
And this is something that other approaches
in machine learning have discovered.
Ultimately we may discover a pathway
for doing what you're suggesting right now.
The machine learning framework is our way
to be able to capture that.
Yes?
Is work considering to further unwrap
that many other layers of Ngedi?
The question is, so what about Ngedi?
Is there continued work going on for the other layers
of the scroll we worked on or other artifacts from Ngedi?
The scroll we worked on was completely unwrapped.
So five wraps, that was all we had.
And all of the visible text is there.
And that data is publicly available.
So anyone else who would love to jump in
and refine our results is welcome to do it.
They can download all of the data.
There is other information.
There are other artifacts from Ngedi.
And to my knowledge no one yet has approached the rest
of the set of artifacts from Ngedi.
And I'm actually dying to do that.
One of the barriers you might ask,
if I might pose a question for you, is funding.
Because these things are very old and they're going to be fine
if we don't do anything.
So you need funding to be able to do something.
So when funding appears, then this work I believe can continue.
Any other questions?
I was wondering if you could comment on some of the challenges
with the Herculaneum scroll and the advances in modern technology
that you think are going to help you eventually unwrap that.
It seems like resolution may be one of those issues.
Yes, so the question is can I comment on the Herculaneum question
and what may have changed or what's necessary
in order to advance that.
And your intuition is exactly right.
Resolution is crucial.
And we've discovered that there's a sweet spot in the resolution
that we think we need to be able to capture everything.
And too high a resolution is not good
and too low a resolution is not good.
We are now capable of being able
to capture the correct resolution.
But another thing about Herculaneum is access.
Because despite the fact that I negotiated access more
than a decade ago to the collection in France,
it's still extremely difficult at the four institutions
that hold this material to work on this material collaboratively.
For obvious reasons, it's incredibly sensitive material,
difficult to handle, there's always risk, right?
And funding is always an issue.
And people are committed to other projects.
So all those things play a role in advancing the agenda.
Yes?
Can you, do you have any confidence
that the technology can differentiate a carbon-based ink
from an ink that contains metal such as copper, iron, or lead
or others that may be historically possible?
So do I have any confidence
that we can differentiate among different kinds of inks in,
for example, tomography?
And my answer is I believe
that reference amplified tomography using a classifier
like machine learning will allow us to create libraries
for everything that we'd like to see.
And then we will be able to classify the difference
between those inks, yes.
And I believe that there are going
to be other tomography-based applications
for doing exactly this kind of thing.
We're going to see an explosion of it in the next five years.
Yes, you had a question.
Yes, so the question is what about other work perhaps
at the Vatican or an Italian team working on Herculaneum?
So my answer is that yes, I'm actually gratified by the fact
that after the two decades of work,
I've been building this miracle or magic trick, right?
Others are beginning to work in the same area.
And there are advances being made by other teams, one at Cardiff
and some Italian groups who have access to material.
So what I'm hoping is that as we all advance the field
of reading the invisible library, right,
what we will do together is share good information
and build a standard for how we report things.
I didn't talk about this in my talk, but let me just say
when I report to you something inside an artifact
that you cannot see and you will never open, who do you trust?
How do you know that the En Gedi text is actually Leviticus?
I mean, I scanned it, right?
I say that my team developed it from software.
It's actually really, really important for the community
and peer review to develop a standard for the review
of these claims so that we can be open about what is
and is not a letter form, what is and is not a text, okay?
Very, very important.
And if you go and read my paper in Science
on the En Gedi scroll, you will see at the end of my paper
that I devote an entire section, and then I released all
of the information from our work for third-party review.
To try to lead by example and say, you know, it's important.
So.
We have one off-site question, which one was the one
from earlier, which is how is the technology evolving?
Off-site question, how is the technology evolving?
Thank you for that question and for staying with us.
Yeah, so there are three different ways I see evolution
happening at the scanning level.
We see things that used to be done only
in high-energy physics facilities
like phase contrast tomography, now available
in desktop lab units, making them available to hospitals
as well as libraries and museums.
So the evolution of scanning technology continues.
Terahertz imaging is also another nascent technology
that's moving forward.
Second thing is that we see machine learning as a tool,
and even though we might not know how to tease
out a classifier in a conventional way,
we can use machine learning and millions of examples
and still make progress without fully understanding necessarily
exactly what's going on.
And the third piece of progress is that collaborations
with museums and libraries are becoming more open
to allowing scientists to explore the corners
of their collection because they realize there's value
in the invisible library.
And so I see those as advances.
What is just sort of a ballpark figure of the cost
of imaging a codex this way?
So the cost, the question is what's the ballpark figure
of imaging a codex, and that depends
on how you arrange the logistics of doing that.
If you're willing to take your codex to a facility
where they are set up, the cost is the scan time,
which can be under $1,000.
Now, if you need to transport equipment, set it up on site,
hire staff to do the calibration and then the scanning
on site, 10 times that.
Now, if you want to consider the cost for the post-processing,
I'm not sure what I would charge you right now to use my software,
but I'm just joking.
We're going to develop our software to be
in the open source domain so that anyone will be able to use
that software, and so we want that to be free
so we can inspire the invisible library going to scale.
That's what we would like to see happen.
So we believe that right now the cost is too high,
but it will be driven down by the fact
that these scanners will become more available,
and we will have software that's available to do this work.
Last question?
To add on to a couple of the other questions,
you talked about possibly being able to differentiate
between different inks.
How about taking it a step further
and maybe layers of inks or even mixtures?
Yeah, in fact, so the question is taking differentiation
of inks a step farther and looking
at layers, mixtures, chemistry.
So two things tangled there.
One is X-ray fluorescence, XRF, gives a complete characterization
of the elemental composition, and people
and instrumentation is moving toward being able to do more
of that in 3D, almost tomographically.
Using reference amplification, we believe we can get
at a better discrimination of things, but probably not
to the degree that you can use something like XRF.
But we have characterized ink as sort of thin film analysis.
That was actually our inspiration.
I come from Lexington, Kentucky, with a long heritage
with Lexmark, a printer division that originally started with IBM,
and that printer division does nothing
but characterize how ink goes onto paper.
And so you can see some of that inspiration as well
in our thinking about ink on papyrus
as thin films being deposited and understanding it that way.
Thank you very much for that question, and thank you very much
for your kind attention.
Thank you.
Thank you.
This has been a presentation of the Library of Congress.
Visit us at loc.gov.